+
REMINISCENCES
KIM IL SUNG
With the Century
8
(Continuing Edition)
REMINISCENCES
KIM IL SUNG
With the Century
8
(Continuing Edition)
FOREIGN LANGUAGES PUBLISHING HOUSE
PYONGYANG, KOREA
Juche 87 (1998)
264
1. In Anticipation of the Day of Liberation
When writing their curricula vitae after the liberation of the country, quite a few
anti-Japanese revolutionary veterans put down “Military Academy 88” or “Training School,
Camp 88” in the column of academic attainments.
The then personnel management officials were amazed at the fact that the anti-Japanese
revolutionary fighters who had gone through arduous guerrilla warfare were all graduates of a
military academy. But what was really meant by “Military Academy 88”?
Later, the officials found out the answer to this question while listening to the great leader’s
account of military and political training during the years of the IAF.
After the formation of the IAF, we underwent intensive military and
political training while carrying out brisk small-unit actions and
reconnaissance activities.
Our educational programme covered a wider range of subjects and a
greater depth of content than those used in regular military educational
institutions. Training was several times as intensive as that in regular military
academies.
Since the training programme was aimed at producing officers, it would
be no exaggeration for the trainees to say that they graduated from a military
academy. I think, therefore, that the anti-Japanese revolutionary veterans had
the years of the IAF in mind when they wrote that they had finished “Military
Academy 88” or “Training School, Camp 88”, on their curricula vitae.
Needless to say, we neither put up such a sign nor issued such a diploma.
After a few years of training, however, they thought that they had completed
the course of a modern military and political university.
Our comrades learned much in those days–military theory, and the
strategy and tactics of modern regular warfare.
270
regiment. He contributed to the victory in the battle to liberate the large city
by his efficient command of his regiment because he had applied himself to
the study of tactics while at the base in the Far East region, I think. He took
the lead in the regimental charge at an enemy’s position. He is said to have
been wounded in several places by splinters from a mortar shell and died a
heroic death worthy of his name. He is remembered as a hero by both the
Koreans and the Chinese in their history.
“Study is also battle.”–this is a truth we learned in actual life. A
revolutionary must study to the last moment of his life, without a moment’s
interruption. Unless he studies, his mind will get rusty. Then, he will be
devoid of foresight.
It is precisely for this reason that Comrade Kim Jong Il always
emphasizes the need to study hard, regarding it as the first part of the process
of training people to be revolutionaries.
We also educated the men and helped them widen their political horizons
through the facilities for extracurricular activities and the means of
information and agitation available at the base.
At the training base was a club equipped with a projection room, a library
and a radio room, where the officers and men used to have meetings and film
shows.
During the broadcasting hour, the base radio gave wide publicity to the
soldiers, platoons, companies and battalions worthy of being held up as
models in their study, military and political training, and daily life. It also
broadcast news about the international situation, especially the news of the
war against Germany, every day.
The IAF also published a newspaper. Each contingent and company had
its wall newspaper, and platoons had their field bulletins. These forms of
media carried news items about the ideological and moral education of the
soldiers, and about the preparations for and reviews of military and political
training.
We also gave the soldiers revolutionary and class education through the
anniversary activities for the Red Army and the October Revolution, May
271
Day and other holidays. In those days the unit gave wide publicity to the
Soviet heroes and heroines who had fought courageously in the
Soviet-German War, which had a good influence upon the soldiers. Memorial
services for the fallen revolutionary comrades-in-arms were organized in a
significant way so that they served as occasions for giving revolutionary
education to the soldiers.
When Ryu Yong Chan died, we also held a memorial service for him at
the training base. He had been enlisted with the help of Kim Jong Suk, who,
during her underground work in Taoquanli, had won him over to the
revolutionary organization and trained him. He was a good fighter. He was
drowned in the Amur when a ship carrying sand for the construction of a
barracks capsized.
We also held memorial services at that time for Front Commanders
Apanasenko, Vatutin, and Chernyakhovski.
During the memorial services our own band played dirges.
The allied forces occasionally organized lectures and meetings with the
participants in the Soviet-German War.
We carried out both the study of military theory and military exercises in
real earnest at the Far East base. We did tactical training, and all kinds of
drills such as shooting, swimming, skiing, parachuting, and radio
communication, to get ourselves ready for modern warfare.
We spent much time on offensive and defensive training, with emphasis
on tactical problems. We also studied artillery, topography, sanitation,
engineering, and anti-chemical warfare.
The training for guerrilla warfare was concentrated upon raids and
ambushes. Because of their rich experience in actual warfare of this kind, all
the soldiers plunged into this training in real earnest.
During military training, we would pitch our tents over a vast plain, the
scene of which is still fresh in my memory.
When I directed the training, the company commanders and platoon
leaders prepared their plans and carried them out. We made it a principle to
undertake our style of training suited to the terrain of our country and the
275
make revolution. That shows what a good person he is. Let’s do our best to
help him, though it costs us a great deal of effort to do so.” Bearing my
advice in mind, Choe Kwang gave him individual training, including diving
into the water from a springboard seven metres high.
I watched them from a distance. Kong was nervous that he might do
belly-flops in the water. Anyhow, he was a man of special character. After
the liberation of the country he served as my aide-de-camp and as a
bodyguard to Choe Yong Gon, and commanded a battalion.
We also had canoeing on the Amur, using a one-man canoe, called an
amurochika in Russian, with one paddle. The local Nanayian people were
good at paddling this canoe. My men would compete in paddling to and from
Khabarovsk.
We also had landing exercises. Since our country is sea-bound on three
sides and has many rivers, river-crossing and landing operations were
essential for future campaigns against Japan.
We once had a landing exercise aimed at Rajin Port.
Parachuting was more difficult than swimming. In this training course the
women soldiers were more courageous than the men. There were some
cowards among the men, but none among the women.
The first stage was a mock drill, in which the trainees would jump from a
springboard into a pile of sawdust. The next stage was getting used to turning
round on a revolving wheel. Women soldiers felt sick during this drill, but
they never gave up.
Parachute practice took place on the vast plain around Voroshilov, where
there was a landing-strip.
The trainees first had to learn how to fold their parachutes. Then they
would ascend a tower about 50 metres high and descend by parachute. This
trained them to turn their bodies once against the wind. Only then were they
allowed to parachute from an aircraft. Ten to twenty soldiers would parachute
first from an altitude of 1,000 metres, and later from 600 metres. The order to
drop used to be given at the height of 800 metres.
The landing-strip was surrounded by wide sugar-beet fields. When we
276
landed, women working in the fields would run towards us, helping us draw
up the chutes and peeling sugar beets for us.
They gave souvenir badges to those who recorded high scores in these
drills. Choe Yong Jin from our contingent took the badge for the highest
score.
I also took part in parachuting on several occasions. The drill produced a
variety of episodes. Some lost their caps, some their boots, some got sprains,
some got caught in trees, and so on.
Soldiers who weighed more than 80 kilogrammes or less than 40
kilogrammes were not allowed to participate in parachuting for reason of
safety. An overweight person might fall too rapidly and get injured, and an
underweight person might be blown far off course. Jon Sun Hui was so light
that she was once blown higher than the plane. Kim Jung Dong also used to
fly astray. He was a very small man. I once saw him hung up in a tree. When
I helped him down, I found that he was as light as a child.
During the Fatherland Liberation War, Kim Jung Dong performed great
exploits in the battles to liberate Seoul and Taejon, and was awarded the title
of Hero of the Republic.
Parachuting was combined with air-borne operations, mostly from 1944.
The training in air-borne operations involved actions to destroy the
resisting enemy while descending by parachute, rapid deployment after
landing, the striking of the enemy from behind, and so on.
During parachute training, we lost some weight and we often felt hungry.
Training was intensive, and on top of that, our food rations were reduced in
order to support the front line after the outbreak of the Soviet-German War.
Under these circumstances, we cultivated idle land to obtain additional
food. We planted potatoes, soy beans and vegetables. We benefited a lot from
the side-line farm.
We also gathered edible herbs to supplement our diet. The area
surrounding the training base was green with bracken, Atractylodes japonica,
aralia shoots, and other edible herbs.
When we boiled soup with edible herbs, the Soviet doctors in the
278
Song, and almost all the women soldiers, including Kim Jong Suk, Pak
Kyong Suk, Pak Kyong Ok, Kim Ok Sun, Ri Yong Suk, Wang Ok Hwan, Ri
Jae Dok and Ri Min.
Most of the units that had been active previously in eastern and southern
Manchuria could not make use of wireless communication. The training of
wireless operators needed assistance from either the Comintern or the
Soviets, which was not easy to get. As they had no wireless operator, they
had captured wireless equipment on several occasions to no avail.
We had appointed messengers to Headquarters and all the units to ensure
communication on foot. Our messengers had had to walk really long
distances that had to be covered at the risk of their lives. No small number of
them had been killed on their missions.
After his enlistment, Ri Chi Ho served as a Headquarters messenger for
several years. While carrying out his mission to ensure communications for
Headquarters, he had endured many hardships, suffering hunger and being
subject to flogging when arrested. Braving these hardships, he had rendered
distinguished services.
For all these sufferings, however, prompt communication was impossible.
That was why we attached special importance to training in wireless
communication.
Training the backbone of the signal corps was imperative not only for the
building of the regular armed forces but also for the establishment of the
communication system, the nerve system of the country, and for cultural and
information services, in the liberated homeland.
In those days Kim Jong Suk, while participating in a variety of drills such
as those for wireless communication and parachuting, went to various parts
of the homeland to carry out small-unit actions there.
The women soldiers were exemplary in the wireless communication drill.
They also participated equally with the men in the other drills such as for
skiing, swimming, parachuting and river-crossing. Their training was very
intensive. Even the Soviet officers said that the drills were several times more
difficult than those they had gone through during their days at military
279
academies. However, all the women soldiers attended the drills without any
complaint.
When starting parachute training, we had decided to exclude the women
with children and those with weak constitutions. The women soldiers were all
disappointed at this. An Jong Suk even came to me to protest in tears: “Some
of us even left our children behind to come here and take part in training!”
When coming to the Far East region, she had left her little child at the wattle
gate of a stranger’s house. Ri Jong In, too, was said to have left her daughter in
the shed of someone else’s vegetable field, before coming to Russia.
They insisted that they should be allowed to participate in the parachute
drill, saying that to hasten the day of national liberation was the only way for
them to meet their dear children again.
Unable as she was to take a bit of the food served at the mess hall, Pak
Kyong Suk was never absent from training in wireless communication. Even
soon after delivery, she participated in the training course with great
enthusiasm. She was so active in both her studies and exercises that the
instructor of the wireless platoon spoke highly of Korean women, noting that
they were indeed hard-working and persistent.
Pak Kyong Suk once accompanied Kim Chaek to the enemy-held area,
carrying wireless equipment on her back, and engaging in small-unit activities
for several months. She was very dexterous in operating the wireless.
Kim Jong Suk was also enthusiastic about her training. Once she sprained
her ankle, but continued to take part in skiing training, although her leg was
badly swollen. When I expressed my worry about her, she showed her
concern about me, taking out a sugar cube wrapped in paper and saying: “If
you do the drill with this in your mouth, you will feel better.”
What worried me most during the parachute drill was whether or not the
underweight women would be able to land properly. However, they would
open the chute in time and land right at the fixed spot. Some of them would
put bricks into their knapsacks to add to their weight when parachuting.
This was the mettle of our fighters in their youth.
Overcoming all hardships with a smile for the future of the liberated
280
homeland was our joy and pleasure, and made our lives worthwhile.
Although the training was intense, and we could not get enough sleep and
were not strong enough, we endured all the hardships and trials with a smile
for the future of the liberated country.
Our veterans still hold those days dear.
Everyone has a time of youth. It is by no means easy, however, to spend
one’s youth so as to recollect it with a high sense of honour and pride even in
the distant future. How valuable and noble it is to devote one’s life to the
cause of the country and the nation, overcoming all manner of hardships, full
of ardour and fighting spirit!
I firmly believe that our young people, too, will make a staunch struggle
for the motherland and revolution, braving difficulties and hardships, by
inheriting the spirit of the martyrs who laid down their lives in the
anti-Japanese revolution.
Anticipating the great event of national liberation when Japan and
Germany were in decline, we channelled great efforts into the study of the
homeland to build up the motive force of the Korean revolution. Without the
correct theory and strategy and tactics of the Korean revolution, and without
knowledge of the history and geography, the economy and culture, and the
ethics and customs of the homeland, it would have been impossible to
achieve independence by our own efforts, to build a new country, and to take
an independent stand and attitude towards the revolution.
Most of our comrades, however, were not well-informed about their
motherland, for they had been born in Manchuria. Born as he was in North
Kyongsang Province, Pak Song Chol had left his hometown at the age of
about ten and lived in Manchuria afterwards. Ri Ul Sol, too, though hailing
from Songjin, had lived in Changbai from the time he crossed the Tuman as a
child until he joined the guerrilla army.
Therefore, I decided to teach the soldiers the Juche-oriented line of the
Korean revolution and about their motherland.
The problem, however, was a lack of books on Korea at the training base.
I obtained books published in Korea by giving assignments to those going