KIM IL SUNG
With the Century
3
FOREIGN LANGUAGES PUBLISHING HOUSE
PYONGYANG, KOREA
1993

 Part I
 THE ANTI-JAPANESE
REVOLUTION
 3

Only those who have shed their blood and
sacrificed their lives to repossess their country
can be said to have fully experienced how
valuable their fatherland is and how arduous and
tortuous is the road to return to it.
 Kim Il Sung
Translation from the preceding page:
On my visit to the old man O Thae Hui back in the homeland whom
I used to call on in the guerrilla zone
Jiandao Was Soaked in a Sea of
Blood by the Barbarous Atrocity of
the Japanese Imperialists
Wandering men and
women on their way to
Jiandao, carrying heavy
loads on their backs and
heads
Dong-A Ilbo, in November 1933, reported that Koreans accounted
 for 80 per cent of Jiandao’s total population of 570,000
Border policeman
searching the
wandering men
and women
Oh, the sea of blood
Spilt by the suffering
people
In the icy cold,
How many have
died a wretched death!
Naitoushan Yulangcun
Guerrilla Bases on the Coast of
the Tuman River (1932-1935)
Yaoyinggou
Jilin Province
Dunhua
Sandaowan
Dahuangwai
Sandaowan
Wangougou
Shirengou
Shenxiandong
Yaoyinggou
Weizigou
Chechangzi
Yulangcun
Yulangcun
Yanji
Antu
Chechangzi
Naitoushan
Niufudong
Yaoyinggou
C h i n a
Baicaogou
Gayahe
Macun
Xiaowangqing
Jinchang
Xiaowangqing Jiandao Province
Dahuanggou Lishugou
U S S R
K o r e a
East Sea of Korea
Saeppyol
Hunchun Yantonglazi
Yantonglazi
Dahuanggou
Sonbong
Hailangou
Onsong
Jongsong
The log-cabin of the headquarters of the guerrilla army in Macun, Xiaowangqing
The seal which
I used
In September 1933,
I met Comrade Choe
Hyon. The amber
cigarette-holder
which I gave him in
memory of our first
meeting
A well which we used A guerrilla army training ground
The First Commanders
of the Guerrilla Zones
Ryang Song Ryong
An Kil
Pak Tong Gun
Pak Kil
Cha Ryong Dok Choe Chun Guk
Kim Hae San
Wangjae Mountain
The place where the meeting of the heads of the underground revolutionary
organizations and the political workers in the Onsong area was held on
March 11, 1933, and the slogan inscribed on a tree near the spot
O Ui Son’s house in Sinhung village, Jongsong County, where I had lunch
on the occasion of the Tano festival in 1933
 On a visit to the site of the Wangjaesan Meeting
The Extension of the Armed
Struggle into the Homeland
Slogan discovered in
the Onsong area
where the meeting of
the representatives
of the party and
other revolutionary
organizations in the
homeland was held
(February 1934)
Thamakgol, where the first traces of
the homeward march still remain
A panorama of the Ryuda Islet
News reports on the
advance of the guerrillas
into the homeland
The Jangdok ferry in Onsong
A secret camp in Mt. Wangjae
A secret camp in Ssokssaegol
A battleground in Unam, Jongsong
A secret camp in Karaji Hill Newspapers of the time reporting
on the work of building party
organizations in the homeland
A mountain overlooking Tumen

Materials for political study published in the guerrilla base
Reminiscences of an officer
of the government-general of
Korea concerning the
activities of the party
organizations in guerrilla
zones
A guerrilla army
barracks in
Dahuangwai and
an underground
passageway
Ri Ki Dong (Pan Qing-you), an
inspector from the Comintern A pamphlet published on the basis of
a treatise which I wrote in May 1933
A panorama of the Xiaowangqing area
Historical
materials
relating to
endeavours
to obtain
assistance
from the
Comintern
Hong Pom Do
Ri Tong Hwi
Ryo Un Hyong
Materials preserved in the archives of the Comintern
I prefer the expression “a faithful
horse and a pet dog” to “a faithful dog
and a pet horse.” Whenever I look back
on my life in Wangqing I am always
haunted by the mysterious white horse,
the horse on which I braved the flames of the
anti-Japanese war.
My First Orderlies
Jo Wal Nam Ri Song Rim
Looking Back on the Past
Platoon leader O Paek Ryong
Choe Kum Suk, who nursed me
devotedly
The Anti-Japanese Allied Front
between Korean and Chinese Peoples
Was Achieved at the Cost of Blood
A secret document of the time
on the arrest and slaughter
during the Japanese imperialist
national-alienation moves of the
guerrillas who had been
dispatched to the Chinese antiJapanese units
A photograph of Ri Kwang’s family
(He is at the far right in the back row.)
Secret instructions of the
Japanese imperialists to divide
and alienate the revolutionary
ranks
Japanese imperialists’
material concerning the
battle of the Dongning
county town (1934)
Shi Zhong-heng
Chai Shi-rong
The building where the machinegun was sited and a view of the
town at the time of the battle of the Dongning county town
Wu Yi-cheng
During the Time in the
Guerrilla Zone
The battleground of the defence of
Naitoushan
The battleground at Sandaohezi
The battleground of the defence of
Yaoyinggou
Yun Chang Bom Jang Ryong San Ryu Ran Han
Kim Yong Hwan Jon Man Song Choe In Jun
The battleground in defence of
Xiaowangqing Inhabitants of the guerrilla zone
rebuilding houses on sites reduced to ashes
by a “punitive” operation
Various Kinds of Weapons and
Ammunition, Medical Instruments
and Medicines Made by Ourselves in
the Guerrilla Zone
Son Won Gum
A sewing-machine used in making
military uniforms
Pak Tu Gyong
Pak Yong Sun
Medicines and medical
instruments
Various weapons
The arsenal in the Xiaowangqing guerrilla zone (model)
A wooden gun
Yongil bombs and
the im- plements
used for making
them
For the Future of
the Revolution
Newspaper reports on the heroic death of
Kim Kum Sun
Born aloft on the nationwide March First Popular Uprising,
Ryu Kwan Sun became a daughter of the nation at the age of
16 and under the banner of Juche, Kim Kum Sun became an
anti-Japanese heroine of Korea at the age of 9. There are
many other young flowers who remain immortal. In what way
can we console the souls of the young martyrs, the souls of
those who left us too early and whose images cannot even be
reproduced in imaginary pictures?
The Lives of
the AntiJapanese
Martyrs in
Northeast
China (May
1936) made
famous the
name of Kim
Kum Sun, an
anti-Japanese
girl heroine
Kim Kum Sun
Ryu Kwan Sun
Ri Sun Hui
Pak Kil Song
A Children’s Corps school in the Yulangcun guerrilla zone
The Korean People’s
Revolutionary Army
Dongfang Zazhi (Oriental Magazine, March 1935) containing an article stating that
there are 3,000 soldiers of the Korean People’s Revolutionary Army in Jiandao
Houses fired during a “punitive” operation by the
Japanese troops
Aerial reconnaissance by
the Japanese imperialists
Japanese troops trampling down
the fields in the guerrilla base
Japanese military trains
destroyed by a guerrilla
army attack
Japanese troops on the rampage during
a “punitive” operation against a
guerrilla base
A watchtower on the western
fort at the time of the
Luozigou battle
Han Hung Gwon Choe Kum San Jo To On
Reports on a defeat of the Japanese imperialists by a guerrilla army attack
The house from which I commanded the Luozigou battle
Laoyeling Mountains, the silent witness to the antiJapanese revolution. I cannot recall the full name of old
man Kim, nor have I any photograph of the man who
snatched me from the jaws of death and led the way to the
home of old man Jo Thaek Ju at the foot of the mountains.
Laoyeling
Old man Jo Thaek Ju and his
daughter-in-law Choe Il Hwa
The horse, which
was captured at the
battle of Laoheishan
and given to old man
Jo Thaek Ju, later
returned to me as a
fountain-pen on
April 15, 1961.
Revolutionary Bonds Formed
in the Wilds of Manchuria
Wang De-lin Tong Chang-rong
Zhou Bao-zhong
Yang Jing-yu Wang De-tai
Anti-Japanese Patriots Who
Shared the Same Ordeal
The martyr Kang U Gyu
(1855-1920), who threw a
bomb at the Japanese
governor-general in Korea at
the age of 65
The martyr Sin Chae Ho
(1880-1936), who died for his
country in Lushun prison,
leaving many historical and
literary writings
The martyr Ri Pong Chang
(1900-1932), taking an oath
before leaving for Tokyo to kill
the Emperor of Japan
The martyr Yun Pong Gil
(1908-1932), who killed and
wounded many enemies
including the commander of
the Japanese forces in
Shanghai
C O N T E N T S
CHAPTER 7. THE PEOPLE’S WORLD
1. The Home Base
2. The Enemy’s Ground by Day; Our Ground by Night
3. The Choice between the Soviet and the People’s
Revolutionary Government
4. The Man from the Comintern
5. The Memory of a White Horse
CHAPTER 8. UNDER THE BANNER OF THE
ANTI-JAPANESE STRUGGLE
1. Ri Kwang
2. Negotiations with Wu Yi-cheng
3. The Battle of the Dongning County Town
4. A Comment on Ultra-Democracy in the Army
5. Operation Macun
6. Arsenals in the Thick Forests
7. An Immortal Flower
CHAPTER 9. THE FIRST EXPEDITION TO NORTH
MANCHURIA
1. The Korean People’s Revolutionary Army
2. The Haves and the Have-nots
3. Crossing the Laoyeling Mountains
4. The Sound of the Mouthorgan Ringing across Ningan
5. The Snowstorm in the Tianqiaoling Mountains
6. In the Bosom of the People
1
CHAPTER 7
The People’s World
The Home Base
The Enemy’s Ground by Day
Our Ground by Night
The Choice between the Soviet and the
People’s Revolutionary Government
The Man from the Comintern
The Memory of a White Horse
February 1933–February 1934
2
1. The Home Base
In mid-February of 1933, guided by old man Ma, we marched
towards the Wangqing guerrilla zone. When they reached the road,
the 18 guerrillas, who had spent the long tedious hours of the last
20 days in the mountain hut in constant discussions of political
affairs, lengthened their stride in high spirits. Although the traces
of the winter-long trials they had undergone still lingered about
them, the marching column was lively and moved at a brisk pace.
It is said that the inhabitants of Wangqing, if asked nowadays
what are the distinctive features of their district, will remark wittily
that the place is noted for the long speeches made by their county
chief, the long primary school buildings, and the long valleys. This
comment must be the brainchild of a local humorist fond of
cracking jokes to express his feeling of attachment to the place.
If such a witty phrase had occurred to me at the time in 1933
when my comrades-in-arms asked me what Wangqing was like, I
could have given them a chance to laugh following their terrible
hardships. But I merely replied that it was a place where many
exiles had settled.
3
By exiles I meant revolutionaries.
In Wangqing the anti-Japanese independence struggle had raged
more fiercely than in the other counties of the Jiandao area, even
from the early years. It was in this county that Hong Pom Do, a
famous veteran commander of the volunteers’ army, dealt a
crushing blow to the Japanese “punitive” forces, and it was here
too that Korea’s Independence Army under the northern political
and military administration headed by So Il, Kim Jwa Jin and Ri
Pom Sok had established its base. It was in this county that Ri
Tong Hwi set about the training of cadres for the Independence
Army.
The vigorous activity of the Independence Army and the
frequent appearance of independence fighters in this area had
awoken the inhabitants’ national consciousness and stimulated
them to fight for their country against the Japanese.
As the tide of the Independence Army movement receded and
the independence fighters withdrew into the Maritime Province of
Siberia and Soviet-Manchurian border districts, the leadership of
the national liberation struggle in the Wangqing area gradually
passed into the hands of the communists, and the main trend of the
struggle shifted from nationalism to communist movement. On the
patriotic soil which had been fertilized by the blood of the
nationalists, the forerunners of a new ideological trend developed
the communist movement.
For all this, the motive force of the struggle remained basically
unchanged. The overwhelming majority of the nationalists became
4
converts to the communist movement. The ranks of the communist
movement thus included not only those who had, from the outset,
taken the communist path, but also those nationalists who had
gradually come to accept communism. It would have been
impossible to launch the communist movement if it had been
restricted to people free of all political taint. This is the principle of
inheritance and innovation, one of the principles which have
guided us in the development of the revolution. Communist
ideology is the acme of human thought, and the communist
movement is the highest stage of the revolutionary movements, but
it would be a mistake to think, for this reason, that the communist
movement starts and develops from a tabula rasa.
In any case, Wangqing was famous for its long record of antiJapanese struggle, for the favourable mood among its masses and
its firm political footing. It was also located near the six towns in
the northern frontier region of Korea, and adjacent to Yanji and
Longjing, which were the centres of the patriotic cultural
enlightenment movement in the Jiandao area. These circumstances
presented various advantages. The saying has it that deep pools
attract fish, and this place naturally attracted many revolutionaries.
In those days people used to say; those who wish to work their
way through university should go to Japan, those who wish to eat
bread should go to the Soviet Union, and those who wish to work
for the revolution should go to Jiandao. This reflected the thinking
of the young people of Korea in those years, when they regarded
east Manchuria as the theatre of battle for national liberation and
5
aspired to join the struggle there.
Going to Jiandao was as dangerous as approaching the opening
of a pillbox, but we marched straight towards the pillbox without
hesitation in order to forward the triumph of the revolution.
We marched with light steps towards the guerrilla zone, not
because a sumptuous meal or comfortable beds awaited us, but
because there we would find the comrades and people with whom
we would share life and death, the ground which we would tread
with the step of freedom, and a land of our own, which defied the
ordinances of the Japanese Emperor and the decrees of the
governor-general.
By February 1933, when we advanced towards Zhuanjiaolou
under the guidance of old man Ma, the work of developing
guerrilla bases in many parts of east Manchuria had been almost
finished, and they had begun to demonstrate the effect they could
have.
To establish the guerrilla bases and use them as a source of
strength to launch a powerful armed struggle was one of the major
policies adopted by the Korean communists at their winter meeting
at Mingyuegou. At this meeting we had stated that in order to
launch a campaign of armed resistance we must establish our
positions, which was simply an expression of our intention to
develop guerrilla bases.
At the meeting at Xiaoshahe in the spring of 1932 we raised the
matter again, as a separate item on the agenda, and discussed
seriously how we could develop the guerrilla bases in the form of
6
liberated areas–a matter which had already been discussed at the
Mingyuegou meeting the previous winter. After the meeting at
Xiaoshahe, we sent able leaders to different parts of the Jiandao
area and increased the tempo of revolutionary training for the rural
villages. This was the first stage in our work of establishing the
guerrilla bases.
The revolutionized rural areas had served as temporary bases
for the Anti-Japanese People’s Guerrilla Army pending the
establishment of the guerrilla zones, and they provided the ground
on which to develop the guerrilla bases. One guerrilla base after
another had been developed in the places we had selected as most
suitable at the Mingyuegou meeting in winter, that is, in the
mountainous areas around Antu, Yanji, Wangqing, Helong and
Hunchun–Niufudong, Wangougou, Hailangou, Shirengou,
Sandaowan, Xiaowangqing, Gayahe, Yaoyinggou, Yulangcun,
Dahuanggou and Yantonglazi. All this was achieved through the
titanic efforts of the Korean communists and at the cost of their
blood in a fierce struggle against the enemy.
The blood spilt and the efforts dedicated to the establishment of
these guerrilla bases in the area along the Tuman River by the
Korean communists Ryang Song Ryong, Ri Kwang, Jang Ryong
San, Choe Chun Guk, Ju Jin, Pak Tong Gun, Pak Kil, Kim Il
Hwan, Cha Ryong Dok, Kang Sok Hwan, An Kil, Ri Kuk Jin, Ri
Pong Su and others will be long remembered in history.
Prominent figures of the time were quick to assemble in the
guerrilla bases in the Jiandao area, travelling from the homeland
7
and abroad. Many people came to the Wangqing area, including
Kim Paek Ryong, Jo Tong Uk, Choe Song Suk, Jon Mun Jin and
other communists of north Manchuria, who settled at
Xiaowangqing. The new inhabitants of Xiaowangqing also
included communists and independence fighters who had been
operating in the Maritime Province of Siberia, as well as the
people who, after many years of underground activity in the
enemy-held area, had moved here because their identity had been
exposed, and patriots and Marxists who, on hearing that Jiandao
was the centre of the Korean revolution, had crossed the border
from the homeland.
The guerrilla bases in east Manchuria thus became the assembly
area for the elite who were firmly resolved to work for the
revolution, or already tempered by experience of the practical
struggle. Therefore, the political character of the population was as
transparent as the limpid water of the River Dawangqing. In terms
of their morale and determination, each of them was a match for a
hundred.
Exploiting the favourable conditions created by the
establishment of this strategic centre of the revolution, the Korean
communists expanded the ranks of the guerrillas, established party
and Young Communist League organizations, the Anti-Imperialist
Union, the Peasants’ Association, the Anti-Japanese Women’s
Association, the Children’s Corps, the Red Guards and the
Children’s Vanguard, i.e., organizations uniting various sections of
the population or paramilitary organizations, in preparation for
8
resistance struggle involving the entire people. Organs of the
revolutionary government were established in every district of the
guerrilla zones. They set about building homes for the people, and
providing them with genuine democratic rights and freedoms
which their ancestors had never experienced. They were true
champions of the people’s interests. The revolutionary government
distributed land among the people, guaranteed them the rights to
work, free education and free medical care, and thus built a society
in which, for the first time in history, everyone enjoyed equality,
and everyone supported and led each other forward, a society in
which the noble morality of mutual respect prevailed. In the
guerrilla zone there were neither rich people who threw their
weight about nor poor people who were weighed down by the
heavy burden of debts and taxes.
The guerrilla bases were vibrant with a rapturous enthusiasm
which no suffering or hardship could ever dampen. It was the
optimistic enthusiasm of people who, completely free from the
fetters of social oppression, were building an independent new life.
The happiness of the peasants, who danced to the beat of gongs as
they drove in the stakes to mark off their plots of the land
distributed by the people’s revolutionary government, heralded the
approach of the greatest event of the century, that sweeping
transformation of the world which was first effected by the Korean
communists in the wilderness of Jiandao. Their life went on amid
continued trials such as had already cost constant bloodshed and
sacrifice, but the people’s dreams of a bright future gave them
9
hope and inspired their songs.
The guerrilla bases in the Jiandao area, a tall citadel in one
corner of the East, were writing a magnificent new chapter in the
history of national liberation in defiance of the enemy’s constant
attacks. They became a symbol of future happiness winning the
adoring admiration of people in the homeland. Wherever they
lived, and whatever their ideals, the Korean people regarded this
citadel, built by the communists at the cost of their own blood, as
their only beacon-light and gave it heartfelt support and
encouragement.
In short, the guerrilla zones inspired the people with hope,
optimism and joy; they were the land of promise, the promise of
the happiness dreamed of by the people since time immemorial.
The guerrilla bases became a source of constant headaches for
the top brass of the imperial headquarters in Tokyo. Having
guerrilla zones located just across the Tuman River, on the
northeastern boundary of Korea, was a sore point for the enemy.
Takagi Takeo1 once aptly described the Jiandao area as the “centre
of resistance against Manchukuo and Japan as well as a communist
artery that runs from the north to Japan through Korea.”
Japanese militarists called the guerrilla bases in east Manchuria
a “cancer destructive to Oriental peace,” an expression which
clearly reflected their fear of the guerrilla zone.
The Japanese imperialists feared the zone, not because the area
was particularly extensive, or because a large communist force
capable of overpowering their Kwantung Army was encamped
10
there, or because there was any possibility of a shell launched from
Jiandao falling upon the roof of the royal palace or the imperial
headquarters in Tokyo. They dreaded it because Koreans who
harboured a bitter hatred for the Japanese made up the vast
majority of the population in that region, and most of these
Koreans were committed to the revolution strongly enough to give
their lives without hesitation in the battle against Japanese
domination.
The fact that more than 90 per cent of the communists and
Young Communist League members in that region were Koreans
is sufficient to explain why the rulers of Japan were so concerned
by the guerrilla zone, regarding it as the greatest obstacle to their
effective rule of Manchuria. Both the valorous generals of the
Righteous Volunteers’ Army, who had fought for over a decade in
the homeland and in the wilderness of Manchuria against the “Ulsa
Treaty” (the protectorate treaty concluded in 1905–Tr.) and the
“annexation of Korea by Japan” forged by the Japanese militarists,
and the surviving forces of the Independence Army, equipped as
they were with matchlock rifles, were still operating in that region
against the Japanese army and police.
The example of indissoluble fraternal ties between the Korean
and Chinese communists was established there, and spread
throughout Manchuria and China proper.
The guerrilla zone in Jiandao was not a “cancer destructive to
Oriental peace,” but the very beacon-light of that peace.
Our efforts to fulfil our strategic task of establishing guerrilla
11
bases for our revolution suffered a severe test when the Japanese
militarist forces launched a wholesale “punitive” operation
intended to smother the anti-Japanese armed struggle in its cradle.
The result of their scorched-earth operations, however, was to
speed up the establishment of guerrilla bases in Jiandao.
In the spring of 1932, the Japanese Kwantung Army in
Manchuria and their army forces in Korea discussed measures for
dealing with what they called the Jiandao affair. The scheme was
to dispatch a task force from their army in Korea to Jiandao in
order to put down the revolutionary movement there. Accordingly
a Jiandao task force composed of a regiment from the Japanese
army division in Ranam, Korea, reinforced by the troops of the
Kyongwon garrison, a cavalry troop, a field artillery battery and an
air-force company, set out on an expedition to the four counties in
east Manchuria where the flames of rebellion had raged during the
harvest season and the seasonal spring food-shortage. The task
force wrought havoc in the villages and towns, massacring and
burning down the homes of those who rose in revolt for their
country’s freedom, for a life of independence.
The enemy’s atrocities began with his assault on Dakanzi in the
early part of April 1932 and drowned the fields and mountains of
Wangqing in a bloodbath. Dakanzi was the village where Ri Kwang,
Ri Ung Gol and Kim Yong Bom had led the harvest-time struggle and
where Kim Chol, Ryang Song Ryong, Kim Un Sik, Ri Ung Man, Ri
Won Sop and other comrades had captured weapons by raiding the
public security office. As the large force of the Ranam 19th Division
12
pressed forward under cover of artillery fire, machineguns and aircraft,
the national salvation army unit under the command of Wang De-lin,
which was stationed in the village, withdrew in haste across Mt.
Mopan to Xidapo, and the defence corps of the village surrendered to
the “punitive” force.
Having occupied Dakanzi, the Japanese bombed the streets of
Wangqing, and then attacked the town, killing its inhabitants,
setting fire to houses and plundering them of property. Even the
house of Li Heng-zhong, the richest man in Wangqing, who
owned the largest estate in the district, was burnt down by the
occupation force.
There followed the destruction of the villages of Deyuanli and
Shangqingli.
The atrocities were so cruel and violent that the inhabitants of
Wangqing composed a song about them;
On the sixth of April, 1932,
Dakanzi was attacked by the Japanese,
Shells bursting, roaring across the hills all around.
Under the rain of bullets and shrapnel
And bombs dropped from aircraft
The poor people were massacred.
Flames from Daduchuan soared into the sky,
The village of Deyuanli was reduced to ashes.
Innocent people were killed all over the fields
And the fields of Wangqing became deserted.
13
Proletarian masses of Manchuria, rise in unity
And fight the enemy.
Boiling blood drives us out to take the field
And raise the flag of victory.
Throngs of people who had lost their homes and families in this
barbarous “punitive” operation, surged into the valleys of
Xiaowangqing and Dawangqing. The Japanese aircraft even
bombed the defenceless refugees. The crystal-clear water of rivers
in Wangqing was suddenly stained red with blood. The guts of
dead people drifted down the rivers.
The village of Zhuanjiaolou, to which we were guided by old
man Ma, had suffered heavily from the atrocities perpetrated by
the Jiandao task force. The barbarous beasts who fell upon the
defenceless village had locked up scores of young people, women
and children in a house and burnt them to death. The village had
been instantly reduced to ashes. The fact that many counties in east
Manchuria circulated a written protest, “An Appeal to Our Fellow
Countrymen in Protest against the Massacre at Zhuanjiaolou!”
indicates just how extensive and how brutal the “punitive” action
was.
Zhuanjiaolou which is located near Luozigou and
Xiaowangqing, one of the major bases of the revolution in Jiandao,
had been under the powerful revolutionary influence of the antiJapanese struggle from the early years. The valley, which was
home to thousands of peasants, raftsmen and lumbermen, provided
14
fine ground for the activities of vanguard organizations such as the
party, the Young Communist League and the revolutionary
organizations of various sections of the population. During the
spring struggle, these organizations had mobilized the masses in
the destruction of the defence corps which had been entrenched in
the village.
The members of the defence corps, frightened by this mass
uprising, had fled into the mountains and become bandits.
The struggle had been successful, but 13 people were killed.
The heated vortex of these struggles transformed Zhuanjiaolou
into a breeding-ground for stalwart revolutionaries. Jang Ryong
San, who was the commander of the 3rd company of the
Wangqing guerrilla unit, had worked as a raftsman between
Zhuanjiaolou and Shanchakou. Hamatang, where Ri Kwang had
worked in the guise of a headman of a hundred households, was
only several miles from Zhuanjiaolou.
The enemy did not hesitate to destroy a whole village in order
to kill one communist: they even had a motto, “Kill a hundred
people to destroy one communist.” The three-point policy of
killing everyone, burning everything, and plundering everything,
which was applied in the attack launched on the liberated area in
north China by Okamura Yasuji, commander of the Japanese
forces in north China, during the Sino-Japanese war had, in fact,
been applied earlier in the “punitive” expedition to Jiandao in the
1920s, and had culminated in a scorched-earth policy when the
guerrilla zones throughout east Manchuria were destroyed in the
15
early 1930s.
The three-point policy and the so-called village-concentration
policy, which had been adopted by the Japanese imperialists in
Korea and Manchuria for the purpose of “severing the people from
the bandits,” were applied by the French colonialists in military
operations to put down the Algerian resistance forces and were
perfected by the Americans in Vietnam.
Sandaowan, Hailangou, Longjing, Fenglindong and all the other
renowned revolutionary villages in Yanji County were littered
with dead bodies. In Sanhanli and in its surrounding area in
Hunchun County more than 1,600 houses were burnt down. The
number of people massacred in Yanji County alone amounted to
ten thousand. No words could be strong enough to condemn all the
crimes committed by the Jiandao task force.
The Japanese even destroyed simple kitchen utensils, in
addition to killing the inhabitants of Jiandao and plundering their
property. They destroyed cooking pots and overturned under-floor
heating facilities. They pulled down the houses remaining and
carried off the structural elements to the town of Daduchuan. The
refugees had to sleep in improvised grass huts and cook on hot
stones, without cooking pots.
The villagers who were unable to flee were threatened with
death if they would not allow themselves to be dragged to the
towns of Dakanzi or Daduchuan.
The “punitive” force made no exceptions for landlords in
applying their forced evacuation orders. It was no secret that a
16
considerable portion of the food supplies and other goods needed
for the anti-Japanese guerrillas had come from landlords and
propertied people. The enemy therefore attempted to cut off the
source of these supplies and stifle the revolutionary army, already
suffering from constant shortages of food and clothing.
Harassed by the enemy’s tenacious pursuit, the revolutionary
masses roamed the mountains, without eating regular meals. But
the mountains did not always provide safe shelter. Even the
deepest of the valleys had dead ends, where the refugees had to
hide in the forest. In such situation a baby’s cry meant death for
everyone.
When the “punitive” troops were searching close to one group’s
hiding people, a woman gave breast to her baby and hugged it hard
to prevent it crying and bringing destruction on the revolutionary
masses. When the “punitive” troops withdrew, the woman found
her baby was dead. Similar tragedies took place in every village
and every valley of Jiandao.
To avoid such accidents, some women used to doze their babies
with opium to keep them fast asleep. Unable to endure the
ceaseless atrocities perpetrated by the “punitive” troops, some
women even gave their beloved babies to strangers.
The women of this country suffered heart-rending trials for
the sake of the revolutionary masses and their comrades-inarms, for the sake of the anti-Japanese struggle which was
dearer to them than their own lives.
Bourgeois humanists may mock at the maternal love of
17
communists, asking how a woman could be so cruel towards her
baby or be so irresponsible with its life.
But they must not hold these women responsible for the
deaths of their infants. If they knew how many bitter tears were
shed as these women buried the soft bodies of their babies in
dry leaves and left their babies in the care of strangers, and if
they knew what deep scars were left in the hearts of these
women, they would condemn and hate the Japanese imperialists
who sent their human butchers to Jiandao. The crime of
trampling upon the maternal love of this country’s women was
committed by none other than the fiends of Japanese
militarism.
If she is to make amends for her past, Japan must repent of
these crimes. Remorse for past crimes cannot, of course, be a
pleasant feeling, but no matter how bitter or shameful such
remorse may be, it will be much easier to bear than the heartrending agony that our mothers and sisters felt as they were
compelled to leave their own flesh and blood behind in the shadow
of strangers’ fences, or as they thrust lumps of opium down the
throats of their babies. In demanding evidence of their past crimes,
the rulers of Japan continue to mock the memory of millions of
Koreans who were slaughtered by their army.
The revolutionary masses faced the alternative of being dragged
down to urban communities by the Japanese or going deeper into
mountains to live there and continue the fight.
How many of these Koreans who had abandoned their fertile
18
paddy-fields to come to Jiandao would obey the enemy’s orders to
move to towns which were under the rule of the Japanese army?
Most of the inhabitants of Jiandao were poor peasants who had
been deprived of their livelihood by the Japanese colonialists, and
left their home districts in pursuit of the promised land like
Ryultoguk.2 Although bled white by the local officials and
landlords, the poor peasants had reclaimed steep hill slopes and
valleys in the mountain ranges of Laoyeling and Haerbaling,
removing the stones and pulling up tree roots by dint of herculean
efforts. Exhausting as slash-and-burn farming was, and poor as
they remained, these peasants had been contented with their lot
simply because they were free of molestation by the Japanese.
Which of them would ever obey the Japanese orders to follow
them to towns, leaving behind homes and lands which they had
made fertile with their own sweat and blood? This was the test set
for the people of Wangqing who had experienced the massacre.
A few people, terrified into submission by the enemy’s
atrocities, began to move down to the towns. But the
overwhelming majority, who yearned to see a new world,
moved deeper into the mountains in spite of the menace of the
enemy. People who only yesterday had shared joy and sorrow
in one mind for the revolution in the same village were now
parting with each other, some going to towns and others to
mountains.
The people who chose the mountains moved to the great forests
of Xiaowangqing and Dawangqing, 25 miles away from the
19
Wangqing county town (Baicaogou). It was around this time that
the family of Ri Chi Baek moved from Zhongqingli to Macun.
The Wangqing county party committee and other county-level
organs had established their bases in Xiaowangqing. The east
Manchuria ad hoc committee which had been operating by
moving between Xilinhe in Yanji County, Taipinggou,
Wangougou and Beidong finally settled in the spring of 1933 in
the valley of Lishugou at Xiaowangqing, which became the
revolution’s centre and capital in Jiandao. The tide of history
brought ourselves and the Chinese party, our revolution and the
Chinese revolution, together, and we came to share a single pulse.
The Wangqing guerrilla base consisted of five organized
revolutionary districts, including district No. 1, which included
Yaoyinggou under its jurisdiction, and district No. 2, which had
Macun and Shiliping under its control.
In those days the Wangqing guerrillas were grouped into three
companies; their prominent commanders and leaders were Ri
Kwang, Ryang Song Ryong, Kim Chol, Jang Ryong San, Choe
Chun Guk and Ri Ung Man.
That was what I learned on my arrival in Wangqing, from a
briefing given by Ryang Song Ryong, one of the founders of the
Wangqing guerrilla force, and Ri Yong Guk, secretary of the
county party committee. These comrades had shown me around
the Wangqing guerrilla base when I visited the place to acquaint
myself with the situation there in the autumn of 1932.
At that time, as I made the rounds of the guerrilla zones in the
20
Wangqing County I had given guidance to the work of the primary
party organizations, the Anti-Japanese Association, the AntiJapanese Women’s Association and other mass organizations. I
had also received reports from the political workers operating in
the Chinese nationalist anti-Japanese units.
Also around this time we had given a short training course on
explosive weapons for workers from the munitions factories in
different counties of east Manchuria and for the commanders of
the guerrilla army.
In those days the leaders of Wangqing County were racking
their brains in the search for solutions to the food problem. More
than one thousand people had thronged into the narrow valley at
Xiaowangqing, where there were only a few dozen houses. The
food reserves were too small to feed them all. Now and then the
guerrillas had attacked the enemy and captured food, but the
amounts were not enough to satisfy the hunger of the many people
in the bases. The contribution of the harvest from the small plots of
arid land in the guerrilla zone was also negligible.
In these circumstances, it was suggested that the food problem
could be solved for the moment by harvesting the crops in noman’s land. By no-man’s land I mean the deserted farm lands
between the guerrilla bases and the enemy-ruled areas.
There were deserted villages near Xiaowangqing and
Dawangqing. Unable to endure the atrocities perpetrated by the
barbarous “punitive” force, the villagers had fled, some of them to
the enemy area, and others to the guerrilla zone, leaving their crops
21
unharvested. Some of the crops belonged to the landlords and
reactionaries who had fled to the enemy area, and some of them
belonged to the peasants whom the Japanese had forced at
bayonet-point to move to Baicaogou and Daduchuan.
The abandoned crops were also coveted by those who had fled
to the enemy area. The landlords and reactionaries came every day
with horse-drawn carts and other vehicles under the escort of
armed self-defence corps men, harvested the crops and carried
them away. Sometimes they even approached the guerrillas’
threshing floor and opened fire.
In view of this, we decided to form harvesting teams in all the
guerrilla districts and mobilize all the people in the base to gather
the crops in no-man’s land without delay. We informed the
Wangqing people of the decision and discussed the measures
required for its implementation with them. The harvesting team
began reaping the crops at the entrance of Xiaowangqing and
advanced towards Daduchuan. The grain was threshed as soon as it
was reaped, then it was stored for distribution to the inhabitants of
the guerrilla zone.
Harvesters working in the fields below the village of thirteen
households had to be protected by the Red Guards against the selfdefence corps, which was equipped with rifles capable of taking
five cartridges at a time. There were occasionally fierce
engagements between the two sides, who fired over the heads of
the harvesters. We were deeply moved by the heroism of the
Wangqing people who worked day and night to gather the crops at
22
the risk of their lives.
Arduous as the struggle was, I was satisfied, as I left
Xiaowangqing, that everything in the base was being done as we
had intended.
On my way back to the guerrilla base, I set myself two major
tasks. The first was to achieve a large-scale expansion of the ranks
of the guerrillas and the second was to intensify the efforts of the
united front to rally the patriotic forces of all social strata in line
with the new situation, in which the theatre of our operations was
shifting to the area of the Tuman River. We also needed to work
with the anti-Japanese units of the Chinese nationalists.
Having guided us as far as Zhuanjiaolou, old man Ma returned
to Luozigou.
The jovial fellow, whom the Anti-Japanese Association
provided as our guide in place of old man Ma, told us an
interesting story about the small units of the Wangqing guerrillas,
and how they had defeated the Japanese “punitive” troops that had
invaded Yaoyinggou and Sishuiping.
The following day, we marched into the guerrilla zone of
Yaoyinggou, the centre of Wangqing district No. 1, with the flag
of the Anti-Japanese People’s Guerrilla Army flying and bugles
blowing at the head of our advancing column.
Hong Yong Hwa, a woman whose nephew Choe Kum San was
my orderly in later years before he was killed in battle, came
running up to the roadside with about 20 members of the
Children’s Corps, and they welcomed us, waving their hands. She
23
was in charge of the work with women under the party committee
of Wangqing district No. 1. She was highly respected by the
soldiers and the people for her devoted work for the guerrillas and
the Chinese anti-Japanese units.
That day the people of Yaoyinggou prepared millet cakes and
buckwheat noodles for us. In the evening they invited us to a
performance given by the Children’s Corps.
Ri Ung Gol, head of the organizational section of the
Wangqing district No. 1 party committee, watched the
soldiers and people enjoy their party together with tears
in his eyes. “General Kim Il Sung,” he said, “we have been
hearing news of your unit for many months. We heard that, after
your expedition to south Manchuria, you attacked Dunhua and
Emu in north Manchuria. The people here have been waiting for
your unit for a long time. Now our hearts feel strong.”
I left the celebration and followed him to the office of the
district party committee. We spent hours in discussion of the work
of the guerrilla zone. Our attention was focused on how we should
go about expanding the party and the other revolutionary
organizations in places like Zhuanjiaolou, and how we should arm
all the people in the guerrilla zone.
When we were elaborating measures for the defence of the
guerrilla zone, a messenger came to us with a secret note from the
enemy-ruled area. The note stated briefly that the Japanese
garrison troops at Daxinggou would attack the guerrilla zone the
next day.
24
“They must be coming to avenge themselves on the guerrillas
who attacked them in December last year,” Ri Ung Gol remarked
with a wry smile, as if he were responsible for the enemy’s attempt
to attack
Yaoyinggou. “Those devils can’t even show proper respect for
guests who have made a journey of hundreds of miles. We were
planning to give your unit a few days’ good rest before you left.
What an unfortunate coincidence!”
“Oh no!” I said. “It’s a happy coincidence. The men’s hands
have been itching after all these months without a fight. It seems
the moment has come for the enemy to pay for the blood spilt by
our people at Dakanzi, Zhuanjiaolou, Deyuanli and Sanhanli.” I
sent a messenger to Ri Kwang, telling him to transfer his unit to
Yaoyinggou in a hurry.
Ri Ung Gol puffed at his hand-rolled cigarette in agitation for a
while, then stood up to go to the party and summon the
commander of the Red Guards. It was clear from his expression
that he had decided to give orders for a general mobilization.
Smiling, I took him by the sleeve and pulled him back into his
seat.
“Comrade Ung Gol, you are going to tell the Red Guards that
the enemy is coming, aren’t you? The party seems to be at its
height at the moment. So don’t disturb them, please. Send them all
home in an hour and let them sleep well until early next morning.
And I, too, will send my men for a sound sleep early tonight.”
It might seem contrary to normal military practice to allow the
25
men and the people to enjoy themselves, instead of alerting them,
when we knew that the enemy was going to attack us very soon. It
was quite natural that the head of the organizational section of the
district party committee, who was also in charge of military
affairs, should glance at me uneasily.
Nonetheless, we kept the message about the enemy’s intentions
to ourselves. The men were sent to their beds as I had suggested. I
did not wish to excite them when they were still tired from the
march. I knew quite well that no stout-hearted man could sleep
when his spirits had been aroused by combat orders.
“At least tonight I must not let their sleep be disturbed. How
many sleepless nights they have already spent during the last
winter!” This was the thought uppermost in my mind that night.
Perhaps it was a case of indulgence inappropriate for a guerrilla
commander. In any case, the men were fast asleep by eleven
o’clock.
Our guide from Zhuanjiaolou and the messenger from the
enemy-held area could not get to sleep until midnight, probably
because they did not feel sure that my decision was correct. Ri
Ung Gol, head of the organizational section, too, tossed and turned
in his bed.
“On our march I found the hills at the entrance to Yaoyinggou
fascinating. What about giving battle there?” I suggested in
whisper. “There’s a motor road running along the foot of the hills,
isn’t there?”
Ri Ung Gol responded to my words by sitting up. “You mean
26
the hills west of Dabeigou? They are a natural fortress.”
We were still discussing this question at about four o’clock in
the morning.
Not long afterwards we climbed the hills, which were the gate
to Yaoyinggou, so to speak. The commander of the Red Guards
and the member of the Anti-Japanese Association from
Zhuanjiaolou accompanied us. The southern sides of the hills were
craggy cliffs, along the bottom of which ran a vehicular road.
Parallel to the road flowed a river called the Xiaotonggou. The
hills were full of rocks which provided natural shelters for the
guerrillas.
We built up piles of stones between crags and then called
together all the men of the Red Guards from Yaoyinggou and my
unit and some members of the special detachment and took them
to the hills. I told them to dig themselves in on the frozen ground
and gave them combat orders, which concluded with an
encouraging speech to the following effect:
Our ancestors used to describe such features of the terrain as
impregnable. Highly advantageous to the defenders, and
disadvantageous to the attackers! An impregnable fortress is a fine
thing, but I have more confidence in your combat efficiency.
Comrades, sing the song of tragedy no more, but let the enemy pay
dearly today for the blood shed by our people. Blood for blood!
That day, more than 80 Japanese troops who were advancing on
four trucks into the valley of Yaoyinggou, were caught in our
ambush and scores of them were killed or wounded.
27
The next day, the Japanese garrison troops at Daxinggou
launched an all-out attack on Yaoyinggou again, only to suffer
heavy casualties before they fled.
That was the first battle we fought in a guerrilla zone in
Jiandao. It was probably named the defensive battle of the
Yaoyinggou guerrilla zone by the historians.
On the evening of the following day the inhabitants of
Yaoyinggou celebrated the victory in the village of Dabeigou. I
still remember the event. The representatives of the various
organizations delivered speeches of passionate congratulation,
waving their fists in the air. Of course, I also made an impassioned
speech that night.
I think it was during that winter or the previous autumn that I
met O Jin U at Yaoyinggou. On that occasion the villagers of
Xiaobeigou held a welcome meeting in our honour at the
Children’s Corps school where O Jin U was working as an
instructor. He occasionally looks back with deep emotion upon our
first meeting, saying that he was strongly impressed by me as I
spoke then, holding a Model 38 rifle in my hand, with the butt
resting on the ground. He was then fifteen or sixteen years old, and
he would follow at my heels, toying with the Mauser that hung on
my waist. He seemed to be very envious of it. We were all
equipped with Model 38 rifles or with the most modern pistols.
I asked O Jin U if he wished to join the guerrilla army. He said
he had applied, but had not been accepted because he was too
young. We accepted him into the 4th Wangqing company the
28
following year or the year after, and took him on an expedition to
north Manchuria.
While we were preparing to leave for Xiaowangqing after
having repulsed the enemy and acquainted ourselves with the work
of the party and mass organizations, a messenger arrived with a
summons for us to go to Macun to discuss an important military
matter.
We left Yaoyinggou immediately.
On our arrival at Xiaowangqing we were received by Wang
Run-cheng, alias Ma Ying, and two other men. He was more often
known by another nickname–Wang danaodai–which meant a man
with an unusually large head.
Dagezi and some other personnel of the guerrilla zone guided
me to the foot of the hill at the back of Macun and the house of old
man Ri Chi Baek where I stayed and where I met the
representatives of the east Manchuria party committee. Dagezi is
Ri Yong Guk’s nickname, it means a long fellow. He was the
secretary of the Wangqing county party committee at the time.
There was a bachelors’ quarters which had been made into a
“travellers’ home,” but I was persuaded to stay at the old man’s
house because the “travellers’ home” was crowded and noisy. Ri
Chi Baek was Kim Jung Gwon’s father-in-law, and the name of
the old man’s wife was So Song Nyo.
Ri Chi Baek’s family were all patriots and revolutionaries.
In his house I dressed in dabushanzi (a Chinese gown–Tr.) for
talks with Wang Run-cheng and his company.
29
“Congratulations upon your arrival in Wangqing!” Wang
danaodai greeted me.
“I am glad to see you again,” I replied, shaking his hands.
I was lucky to meet a revolutionary who was an old
acquaintance of mine in Wangqing, where I was a stranger.
I had first met him at Antu, when I was concentrating on work
with the anti-Japanese units of the Chinese nationalists, following
my return from the campaign in south Manchuria. In those days he
and Chen Han-zhang had been working with the soldiers of
Commander Meng’s regiment of the national salvation army.
Commander Meng’s regiment had moved from north
Manchuria to the Antu area in order to make contact with Tang Juwu’s units of the self-defence army in the Liaoning area and enter
into cooperation with them. The Chinese communists who were
working with Wu Yi-cheng in his national salvation army unit had
been trying to extend the anti-Japanese struggle throughout
Manchuria by arranging an alliance of the anti-Japanese forces in
north and south Manchuria.
Commander Meng’s regiment had been sent to Antu by Wu Yicheng on another mission to obtain opium needed to raise funds
for military purposes. The Antu area was a major source of opium
and insam (ginseng–Tr.). Tang Ju-wu had also sent his men to
Antu with a view to establishing a monopoly of the opium trade in
that area. In those days opium was used in place of currency.
“Comrade Kim Il Sung,” Wang Run-cheng said half-jokingly at
a meeting of the anti-Japanese soldiers’ committee held at Ri
30
Kwang’s house, “the success of the national salvation army units
in cooperation with your unit in the attack on Dunhua and Emu
can be attributed to opium. The large amount of opium that was
obtained in Antu and distributed among my men had strengthened
their morale.”
We were familiar enough with each other to speak our minds
frankly on such matters.
Wang helped us a great deal in the course of our work in Antu.
He used to carry messages to maintain contact between myself and
Hu Jin-min or Zhou Bao-zhong. Since he was in charge of
propaganda in the national salvation army, he had had free access
to the commander’s headquarters, to say nothing of regimental,
battalion and company headquarters. He was a good messenger for
me and for the communists who had been posted to the national
salvation army.
As was usually the case with intellectuals who had been trained
in a normal school, Wang, though a man of large build, was gentle
and good-natured. He had taken up the revolutionary cause during
his normal school days at Ningan, under the influence of
schoolmates who had studied in large cities like Beijing, Nanjing
and Tianjin. His final commitment to the revolutionary cause was
due especially to the influence of Comrade Pan, who was on the
provincial party committee.
“Comrade Kim Il Sung,” Wang said. “The revolution is raging
fiercely in east Manchuria now, and in this situation we expect a
great deal from you. We are very glad of your arrival in Wangqing
31
at a time when the revolution in east Manchuria needs able
strategists to develop party work, guerrilla activities, and work
with the national salvation army.”
He analyzed the developments in north and east Manchuria in
considerable detail, and we had a frank exchange of views
concerning the tasks facing the party organizations in east
Manchuria at that time. The most urgent task we discussed was the
establishment of a system of unified command over the companies
that had so far been operating autonomously in the different
guerrilla zones, and also the increasing of our military forces and
the improvement of their quality. This matter was also later
discussed in detail with Tong Chang-rong.
As a result, the guerrilla companies in Wangqing were brought
under the unified command of their battalion headquarters.
This was followed by a regrouping of the companies in other
counties in east Manchuria into battalions, and by the
reappointment of their commanders. These were preparations for
the full-scale development of guerrilla warfare.
These were the impressive events that marked our arrival in
Wangqing. We soon became used to the new surroundings. The
sense of exotic newness we usually felt whenever we changed our
theatre of activity soon gave way to an attachment to the new place
and curiosity about it.
By 1933 I had lost nearly all the people dearest to me. The
death of my mother had orphaned her three sons, and the sweet
home of these three boys at the village of Xiaoshahe among the
32
field of reeds had been left deserted and filled with cobwebs. All
that remained with me were my two younger brothers, who were
in the charitable care of strangers, and my grandparents who had
given their beloved sons to the country, and were now living in
isolation at my old home in Mangyongdae, for which I felt a bitter
nostalgia. My feelings of filial devotion to them could not reach
out to the hearth of the home, and my desire to take loving care of
my brothers was a source of futile worry.
The only place where the tender feelings of my heart could
produce any effect was the guerrilla zone in which I was to fight.
The people here would become as dear to me as my own
grandparents, my own parents and my own brothers. In the
personality of the mistress of the house, So Song Nyo, I
rediscovered the warm character of my own mother, her love and
benevolence.
Because of the enemy’s constant blockade and “punitive”
assaults, the guerrilla bases in east Manchuria faced numerous
trials from the outset. In this historic land of Wangqing which is
fixed for ever in my memory, many battles were fought, much
blood was spilt, and we endured great agonies. Sometimes scores
of people were killed, or scores of houses and barracks burnt
down, in a single day. The hospitals were crowded with wounded
soldiers and sick people. Food-shortages throughout the guerrilla
zone and recurrent famine caused innumerable deaths. Sometimes
an epidemic threatened the entire population of Jiandao with
extinction.
33
In that part of the world there were neither shops, nor markets,
nor merchants, nor any money in circulation. Here the law of value
had no effect. Shoes and clothing for the population were obtained
by capturing the enemy’s supplies. From time to time Leftist
deviation shook the guerrilla zone and plunged it into
apprehension.
Nonetheless, all these difficulties by no means dominated life
there. A new way of living in freedom and happiness–although in
a somewhat limited and relative sense–together with the optimistic
spirit of a people who had been liberated from the tyranny of the
enemy, defined the main line of development in the guerrilla zone.
The difficulties were enormous, but the morale of the soldiers and
civilians was high. In this isolated region, beyond the reach of the
administrative power of Manchukuo and Japan, the Korean
communists created a culture and a morality which were more
progressive and revolutionary than those in any other part of the
world.
For this reason we treasured the guerrilla base with all our
hearts.
The heroic action of our nation to defend the guerrilla base was
displayed daily throughout the whole of east Manchuria.
The remote valley of northern Jiandao, where the day dawned
in battle and the sun set in battle, the guerrilla base where a new
way of life and a new ethics were beginning to thrive even amidst
the thunder of bursting shells–this became my dear home.
34
2. The Enemy’s Ground by Day;
Our Ground by Night
On arrival at Macun, we were again accorded a hearty
welcome, which I thought was more than we deserved. The news
of our success in the battle at Yaoyinggou had quickly spread
throughout Jiandao, and the inhabitants of Xiaowangqing greeted
us with wild enthusiasm.
Life in the guerrilla zone, which was completely free from the
enemy’s rule, fascinated us.
However, not everything that happened in this new world was
to my liking. We were not always pleased by the attitude to work
and the way of thinking of some of the people at the helm of the
revolution in Jiandao.
What surprised me most was the Leftist tendency that was
spreading like an epidemic among revolutionaries in east
Manchuria.
This tendency was especially conspicuous in the work of
consolidating the guerrilla base.
When discussing the establishment of the guerrilla bases at
35
meetings held at Mingyuegou and Xiaoshahe we had agreed on the
definitions of three types of bases–a full-scale guerrilla zone, a
semi-guerrilla zone, and a base of activity–and on the need to
ensure a reasonable balance among them.
Some communists in east Manchuria, however, expressed
enthusiasm only for the development of a full-scale guerrilla zone
in the form of a liberated area, and paid insufficient attention to the
establishment of the semi-guerrilla zone and the base of activity. In
the early days, efforts in Wangqing were also limited to the
establishment of liberated areas. The Xiaowangqing guerrilla zone,
for instance, was made into a Soviet district in the form of a
liberated area which was as large as a county in our country today.
This district was under the control of the revolutionary forces. In
those days a full-scale guerrilla zone was also called a Soviet
district.
Having the Soviet flag that symbolized a worker-peasant
government over this wide territory, the cadres busied themselves
with nothing in particular, simply creating a lot of fuss amid
shouting “Revolution! Revolution!” They seldom fought outside
the guerrilla zone, but spent day after day mouthing empty slogans
about establishing a proletarian dictatorship and building a society
for the proletariat. On public holidays they assembled in the yard
of the soldiers’ barracks or in a children’s playground to dance
Russian dances or sing the May Day. Sometimes cadres from the
east Manchuria ad hoc committee and from the county would get
together and have a heated argument about something or other.
36
We, too, spent the spring season in this atmosphere, unable to
concentrate on anything. By degrees, however, we came to
recognize this Left-wing communist mistake for what it was and
seek ways of correcting it.
The guerrilla zone was crowded with people. During its
formation thousands of refugees and exiles had flocked to the
Wangqing base alone. The situation was similar in Hunchun, Yanji
and Helong.
Such large numbers of people in a mountain valley with a very
limited area of arable land posed the problem of food supplies.
Everyone had to eat bean gruel. The beans were ground with a
millstone and cooked, together with a pinch of grain, into a gruel.
When this gruel was available, people might complain about it, but
when these supplies ran out, we had to eat cakes made of pine bark
which was first boiled in caustic soda water and then pounded, or
else we were compelled to allay our hunger with boiled bracken,
the shoots of Atractylodes, and the roots of broad bellflower,
Codonopsis lanceolata or Solomon’s seal. In spite of this, we sang
revolutionary songs and made speeches, waving our fists in the air
and calling on the people to overthrow imperialism, the proJapanese elements and the coterie of parasites. That was the way
things were done in the early days of our life in the guerrilla base.
Of course, we engaged in a number of small battles, such as
raids on police stations, attacks on the enemy’s supply convoys,
and counter-attacks on enemy forces which had invaded the
guerrilla zone and from which we captured weapons. When we
37
returned from triumphant battles, the people shouted hurrah, and
waved flags, but there were not many major battles, and we spent
most of our time on standing guard on hilltops and protecting
refugees. The territory under our control was large, but there were
not many rifles or armed troops. A few rifles were allotted to each
of the groups of soldiers, mostly in order to guard the base.
When we tried to increase the ranks of our armed soldiers, we
were obstructed by weak-kneed secretaries or committeemembers, who whined that the revolutionary army was not a
united-front army, and that therefore, it must recruit only the most
stalwart of the workers and peasants, not taking just anybody, in
case it should become a rabble. In those days the anti-Japanese
guerrillas in the Soviet area were called the worker-peasant
guerrillas.
The defence of a territory that covered thousands of square
kilometres was overtaxing the strength of a few companies. Since
there were many gaps in the defence structure, the “punitive”
forces could easily penetrate deep into our defences, and then
thousands of the local inhabitants had to pack up their things and
seek refuge. Such situations caused panic among the population
almost every day.
The Leftist leaders, who regarded the size of our liberated
territory as the decisive factor in the triumph of the revolution,
were bent on maintaining a large territory, without any scientific
assessment of the balance of hostile and friendly forces and were
motivated only by their subjective desires. They even demarcated
38
the guerrilla zone and the enemy-ruled area in an artificial manner,
by calling the former the “Red territory” and the latter the “White
territory.” They labelled the inhabitants of the enemy-held area as
“reactionaries” and those in the intermediate zone as “doublefaced” and suspected or rejected them for no reason. The people
from the homeland were also treated as “reactionaries” and that
was the most serious problem.
The women in the “Red territory” had their hair bobbed in order
to distinguish themselves from those in the “White territory.” A
“Red” style of written and spoken language, songs, schools,
education and media differed from the “White” style. People
travelling to the “Red territory” from the “White territory” were
strictly checked and even after interrogation, they were not
allowed to go home immediately. Orders to deal with the “White”
people who came to the “Red territory” as enemy spies were
issued from the top of the hierarchy down to the Children’s Corps
organizations. Some of the members of the Wangqing county party
committee harboured continuous ill feelings towards the people
who had moved from the Xiaowangqing valley to the towns.
Some men of the Red Guards who had been posted as longrange look-outs at Dongricun once detained a peasant from
Daduchuan who had come to buy an ox in the guerrilla zone. A
Leftist element on the county party committee, informed of the
interrogation of the unidentified peasant, told the investigators to
press the suspect person to reveal his identity even by torturing
him, saying that he might possibly be a spy. No matter how
39
severely they tortured him, the peasant insisted that he was not a
spy. In fact, the peasant was neither a spy nor an agent of the
enemy. But the Leftist wronged this innocent man and ordered his
money to be confiscated.
Recollecting the undisclosed abuses perpetrated by the Leftists
in the guerrilla zone in those days, Choe Pong Song, who worked
for the Young Communist League in Wangqing for many years,
said:
“The mere mention of the Leftist deviation always reminds me
of events in the guerrilla zone in the early days. The Leftist abuses
in Jiandao were really shocking. Once we guerrillas captured a
cart-load of salt from the Japanese on the Wangqing Pass and took
it to Xiaowangqing. This was probably at the time when you, Mr.
President, were operating in south Manchuria. The carter was a
Korean who led a hand-to-mouth existence in the lower depths of
society. The Leftist elements labelled him as one of the ‘doublefaced’ people and dealt with him as a criminal. They said he was a
traitor because he had carried supplies for the Japanese. So
naturally the people outside the guerrilla zone did not view the
‘Red territory’ in a favourable light. It was disgusting.”
Such abuses as the punishment even of innocent people,
without discriminating friend from foe, were also frequent in the
guerrilla zones in other counties as well. The problem was very
serious, because all these cursed acts were committed
unhesitatingly in the noble name of the revolution, and they forced
a large number of revolutionary people who were opposed to the
40
Japanese to move across to the “White territory.”
The Leftists went so far as to arrest the relatives of old man Ri
Chi Baek, when they came from Onsong to Shangqingli to attend
the memorial ceremony for their parents, who had been killed in a
“punitive” action by the enemy. The Leftists regarded them as
“reactionary” people.
Whenever I saw cases of such injustice, I felt thoroughly
ashamed. If a man who professes to be a communist punishes an
innocent person by labelling him a reactionary, he is no longer a
communist, but the worst of criminals.
Even after our arrival in Wangqing, these criminals continued
to throw their weight about, behaving like “privileged
revolutionaries” that no one could ever touch, and lording it over
the masses.
Some people regarded the Soviet as everything, and this
viewpoint was a serious problem to us. We came to the conclusion
that if we were to preserve the base and develop the revolution, we
must overcome the tendency of isolation and extend the theatre of
our operations. In other words, it was imperative to abandon the
shortsighted practice of clinging only to the defence of the
guerrilla zone, and to form large elite forces so as to launch active
military and political operations with freedom of mobility.
If the army was to launch full-scale operations, it had to be
relieved of the burden of defending the base. We found a solution
to this problem in creating and expanding many semi-guerrilla
zones in the vast territory surrounding the full-scale guerrilla zone,
41
and in getting them to support it. We sought our breakthrough to
fresh victory in the creation of semi-guerrilla zones.
I met and talked with Tong Chang-rong on many occasions in
order to learn the experience of guerrilla zones established in
China proper.
In the autumn of 1931, a Chinese Soviet Provisional
Government was proclaimed in Ruijin, Jiangxi Province, and a
Soviet zone was established. According to Tong Chang-rong, the
central Soviet zone, in which the headquarters of the Chinese
revolution was located, covered a very large area with millions of
inhabitants and the military forces of several armies. Tong Changrong himself had experience of establishing a Soviet zone in
Henan Province.
In those days the Red Army under the leadership of the Chinese
Communist Party numbered more than a hundrend thousand, and
controlled a vast area extending from the southern part of Jiangxi
Province to the northern area of Guangdong Province.
My interview with Tong Chang-rong convinced me that the
experience of the establishment of the Chinese Soviet zone, which was
equivalent to a sizable independent state in terms of territory and
population, could not be applied to our efforts in the area on the
Tuman River, and that establishing semi-guerrilla zones in the area
that surrounded the full-scale guerrilla zone and in the northern region
of Korea was the only way for the Korean communists active in the
base of Jiandao to defend their revolutionary headquarters and launch
a guerrilla war on a large scale.
42
The need for a semi-guerrilla zone became ever more pressing
in the course of the practical armed struggle. The overwhelming
task of defending a large area with a small force made it
imperative to work out a fresh solution as soon as possible. If we
had tried to formulate a theory at our desks by merely analyzing
classical theory or drawing on the experiences of Russian
Bolsheviks or the Chinese in Ruijin, we might merely have
recognized the need for the guerrilla base of a new type, different
from the type of the liberated area, but failed to press forward at
speed with its establishment in a correct understanding of the
pressing nature of this question.
The question of the semi-guerrilla zone was not taken up as a
matter simply of the form of the base. The discussion reflected the
ideological question of whether to establish the principle of Juche
in the revolution by overcoming dogmatism and the worship of the
great powers; it concerned the view to be taken of the masses and
the need to overcome the Leftist error and accept as the motive
force of the revolution the broad masses of the people who had
been rejected as the “double-faced”; this was a serious question of
direct relevance to the formation of the revolutionary forces, the
question of whether or not to rally them in an anti-Japanese
national united front.
By a semi-guerrilla zone we meant an area which would be
partly under our own control and also partly under the control of
the enemy, an area which would be under the enemy’s formal
territorial rule, but effectively, under our control, which would
43
provide support for the anti-Japanese guerrilla army, train
revolutionary forces, including reserve forces for the guerrilla
army, and play the role of a liaison between the guerrilla zone and
the enemy-ruled area. Figuratively speaking, it would be governed
by the enemy during daylight, but would come under our control at
night.
The semi-guerrilla zone was suited to our struggle to build a
revolutionary base. We found no significant examples of this type
of guerrilla zone in the foreign experiences of guerrilla warfare. It
was the development of our revolution that posed the
establishment of the semi-guerrilla zone as a pressing task.
In mid-March 1933, we advanced to the area around Mt.
Wangjae, Onsong County, North Hamgyong Province, in order to
extend the armed struggle to the homeland and bring about a rapid
acceleration of the Korean revolution as a whole, centring on the
anti-Japanese armed struggle. The strategic objective we had
maintained since we began fighting the Japanese was to spread the
armed struggle to the homeland and liberate the country, an idea
which nothing could ever erase from our minds. Creating a semiguerrilla zone in the area of the six towns and the surrounding area
of the northern part of Korea was a prerequisite for extending the
armed struggle to the homeland. A firmly-structured semi-guerrilla
zone would contribute to the elimination of various Leftist
practices in the development of the guerrilla zones.
We had formed a detachment consisting of 40 men from the
2nd company of the Wangqing battalion, who had been operating
44
from their base at Sancidao, and ten commanding officers and
political workers who had been selected from the companies, a
detachment to be sent to the homeland. We then sent an advance
party of several men under the command of platoon leader Pak
Thae Hwa to the Onsong area.
Certain people, who were influential in the east Manchuria
party organization at the time were very displeased with our plan
of operations in the homeland, and obstructed its implementation
in every possible way. They warned us that the Korean
communists in China were demonstrating a nationalist tendency to
“extend the revolution to Korea” by fighting for the Korean
revolution, and that we should abandon the idea of operations in
the homeland because it was contrary to the principle of one party
in one country.
I rejected their objection and continued to prepare for the
operations, being convinced that loyalty to my national duty meant
loyalty to my internationalist duty, and that the Korean
revolutionaries had an inviolable right to fight for the liberation of
Korea.
At about this time, I was incensed by an incident that cast a
shadow over the anti-Japanese guerrillas’ advance to the
homeland. A man from the 2nd company who had been to Onsong
of the homeland on a liaison mission was arrested on his return by
a man named Kim Song Do and taken to the east Manchuria ad
hoc committee.
The 2nd company commander An Ki Ho and its political
45
instructor Choe Chun Guk hurried to see me at Macun and
complained furiously of Kim Song Do’s abuse of power,
denouncing the arrest of this man without his commanders’
knowledge.
Choe Chun Guk, who used to be as gentle as a newly-wed bride
and so well-mannered that he seldom spoke ill of anybody, even
went so far in his abuse of Kim Song Do as to call him by his
nickname “one-eyed Wang.” I simply listened in silence, for I was
not acquainted with Kim Song Do. All that I knew of him was that
he had been the head of the propaganda department of the east
Manchuria ad hoc committee of the Young Communist League,
had recently been appointed to the east Manchuria party ad hoc
committee, and was now inspecting different counties in east
Manchuria. In the east Manchuria party organizations, those cadres
from higher structures who travelled around and gave guidance to
their subordinate organizations were called inspectors.
I rebuked Choe Chun Guk sternly for his indecent manner of
speech.
“Comrade Chun Guk, when did you get into the bad habit of
calling people by indecent nicknames? True, Kim Song Do has
ignored us and gone too far, but can’t you have the magnanimity to
respect his person?”
Choe Chun Guk was very tolerant of criticism.
“I am sorry,” he apologized with a serious expression. “Forgive
me if I was indecent or rude.”
“The guerrilla zone is a place where people live close together,
46
so people may well have nicknames. But ‘one-eyed’ is too rude a
nickname.”
At that moment, I was more offended by the Wangqing people
who called Kim Song Do “one-eyed Wang” than by his arrest of
the 2nd company man.
I asked why Kim was called Wang. Choe Chun Guk answered
that the inhabitants of Jiandao had probably nicknamed him Wang
because Kim Song Do, a Korean, smelt like a Chinese and
grovelled too much to his superiors.
On my way to the east Manchuria ad hoc committee, I dropped
in at the county party committee and discovered that there, too,
Kim Song Do was known by the name of “one-eyed Wang.”
From Ri Yong Guk in the office of the county party committee,
I learned that Kim Song Do was a veteran party member who was
admitted to the Korean Communist Party as early as 1927, and
worked as a member of a party cell committee under the
Manchurian general bureau of the Tuesday group before being
arrested by the Japanese consulate police and imprisoned and
beaten. After his release from prison, he quickly transferred to the
Chinese party and was promoted to a post at ad hoc committee
level. He wore dark glasses, probably in order to disguise his
ruined eye, and went about in dabushanzi.
Ri Yong Guk described Kim Song Do as a “man not only
eloquent but also tactful enough to slip socks onto the feet of a
flying crow.”
I had interviewed Kim Song Do for about three hours in the
47
office of the east Manchuria ad hoc committee.
As I sat face to face with him, my intention of accusing him of
an abuse of power gave way to a feeling of pity for him. The eye
that had withered away and his darkish complexion gave him an
exhausted look that aroused pity in me. How praiseworthy and
moving it was that despite the physical handicap of the loss of one
eye, this man was trekking across steep mountains in Jiandao in
the service of the revolutionary cause!
“Comrade Inspector,” I addressed him, trying to be courteous
and refraining from raising my voice. “Why did you arrest the man
at his workplace, without so much as discussing his case with us?”
Kim Song Do gazed at me over his glasses. His look seemed to
express displeasure with me and question how I dared to ask such
an insolent question of an inspector of the ad hoc committee.
“It is strange that you should ask me such a question. You know
quite well that this man’s act in crossing the border is an
expression of nationalism, which contradicts proletarian
internationalism.... We consider him to be a member of the
‘Minsaengdan.’ ”
“On what grounds?”
“His journey to and from Korea is an expression of nationalism,
and this nationalistic error has made him a member of the
‘Minsaengdan.’ Can he be anything else?”
“Is this your own view?”
“Yes. And my superior’s also.”
After this answer, I was tongue-tied for a short while, because I
48
felt more pity than repugnance for him.
It was strange that I should feel a certain sympathy for him, not
contempt, at that moment. I should have been angered by the
tomfool and shattered his nonsense with cogent argument. His
totally absurd prejudice and childish way of thinking, so much out
of keeping with this illustrious position of inspector on the east
Manchuria ad hoc committee, must have aroused this sense of pity
for him in me.
“How miserable that he should be mentally crippled in addition
to his physical handicap!” I thought to myself. “Of course, the
stamina with which he devotes himself to the revolution, even
wearing dark glasses to conceal his withered eye that could be
noticed by secret agents is laudable. How good it would be if this
mettle were reinforced with a sound intellect! How can a man
suffer from such miserable mental disorder?”
“You seem to be identifying nationalism with the
‘Minsaengdan,’ ” I said in a quieter tone of voice. “How can you
dare to weigh them on the same balance? Is it not too fallacious a
syllogism to tar the two with the same brush because a few
nationalists like Pak Sok Yun, Jo Pyong Sang and Jon Song Ho
have suggested the formation of the ‘Minsaengdan’? As far as I
know, you, too, first belonged to an organization which was under
nationalist leadership, and then later you joined the communist
movement. Would you accept it if for this reason you were
labelled a ‘Minsaengdan’ member? Answer me.”
“How could I....” he mumbled.
49
I gave him a few minutes to reflect, and then resumed my
forceful argument, “I presume you had Tong Chang-rong in mind
when you mentioned a superior of yours. But I don’t think he is
such a narrow-minded man. If Secretary Tong Chang-rong had
made such a decision out of minor prejudice or misunderstanding,
without being fully informed of the actual state of affairs, you
comrades, who are familiar with the Korean situation, should have
advised him in every possible way so that he had a correct
understanding, shouldn’t you?”
Kim Song Do was silent.
On my way back to my headquarters, taking with me the
arrested comrade, I could still hardly rid myself of a feeling of pity
for him.
To be candid, I always felt sympathy for him through all the
many conflicts we had during debates on theoretical matters, until
he directed the purge of revolutionaries, dancing to the tune of
others.
But I ceased to sympathize with him then, when I saw him
murdering many staunch revolutionaries under the pretext of
purging the “Minsaengdan.” Later, he himself was executed on a
charge of being a “Minsaengdan” member. My experience over
decades of turbulent events showed me that terrorists fell at the
hands of terrorists, that Leftists were tried and executed by
Leftists, and that self-destruction was the fate in store for those
who lacked the guts to stick with their own conviction and tried to
run with the hare and hunt with the hounds.
50
The detachment to the homeland that had left Macun early in
March, arrived on this side of the Tuman River opposite
Thamakgol, Onsong County. It billeted itself on the village of
Solgol and during the week while it awaited the arrival of the
advance party that had infiltrated the Onsong area, it set about the
work of revolutionizing the village and its surrounding area to
build a semi-guerrilla zone. During daylight, we had combat
training at the western foot of Mt. Songdong and at night we
visited the villagers, establishing underground organizations
among them.
At that time, we also worked among the chiefs of ten
households and a hundred households, who were at the bottom of
the administrative hierarchy of the puppet state of Manchukuo.
Because we respected the interests of the people and established
our relations with the local inhabitants in accordance with the code
of conduct of the revolutionary army, we left an excellent
impression on the people. While staying at the village of Solgol
the guerrillas gave the peasants a helping hand with many jobs.
Some of us brought bush clover down from the mountain and even
mended the fences of the villagers with whom we were billeted.
The story of an axe, well-known from the reminiscences of Pak
Yong Sun, occurred during our stay in the village.
One day, with a view to helping my Chinese host, I took an axe
and a water pail to the Tuman River. In winter the villagers used to
fetch drinking water from the river. The water was drawn from a
hole made by breaking the ice with an axe or a pickaxe.
51
When I had nearly finished breaking a hole in the ice, the sharp
head of the tool slipped from the handle and fell into the hole. I
raked about for hours with a long pole with hooked prongs on its
end, but it was in vain.
I offered a generous price to the master of the house,
apologizing to him sincerely for my carelessness. The old man
would not accept the money, saying that, although he was too old
to help the revolutionary army, he was grateful to me for my
helping hand every morning. I insisted on his taking the money,
saying that if I were to leave the place without making good his
loss, I, the commander, would be violating the discipline of the
revolutionary army.
Although I had paid generously for the axe, I was still haunted
by the thought of it. No amount of money would be able to make
up for the old man’s loss of his cherished tool. In the spring of
1959, I asked a group of visitors to old battlefields of the antiJapanese armed struggle in northeast China to apologize once
again for me to the old man in the village of Liangshuiquanzi.
To our regret, however, when the group arrived at the village,
the old man was no longer in this world.
We crossed the Tuman River, and then, guided by the advance
party, climbed Mt. Wangjae at about four or five o’clock one
afternoon.
The heads of the revolutionary organizations in the region of
the six towns and the political workers, who had been in hiding
among the larches on the ridge, came out to meet us.
52
On the summit of the mountain, which was densely covered
with young oak trees, I surveyed the scenery for a long time. There
is a saying that a decade changes the world, but this part of the
country had been changed in less than three years. The slag heaps
from a coal-mine were a new sight that had not existed when we
were forming the homeland party organization on Turu Hill, and
so was the train that was running along the Onsong-Unggi
(Sonbong) line, one small piece of the new Onsong, which had not
been there in the autumn of 1930 or in the spring of 1931.
Along with the mountains and the rivers, the people and the
revolution had grown and advanced. Since we were here last, new
anti-Japanese revolutionary organizations had been created one
after another and begun their activity.
The fighters in the six towns and surrounding areas had been
enveloping the enemy’s administrative machine in an immense
steely network of revolutionary organizations in the northern
frontier zone of Korea, where the heads of the Japanese
military and police structures in charge of keeping the peace
boasted of perfect security on the border.
Our armed struggle, too, had grown. The guerrilla forces in east
Manchuria, for instance, had developed into battalions. The
battalions in different counties were to develop into regiments and
then into divisions before very long. The armed guerrilla forces of
the Korean communists were active in south and north Manchuria
as well. The day when our divisions and corps would advance in
force into the homeland and destroy the enemy was not too far
53
away. We, their advance party, were already on the soil of Onsong.
As I stood, lost in these thoughts, I recalled a piece of poetry
composed in Chinese characters by General Nam I, which I had learnt
at Changdok School from my maternal grandfather. I chanted it in a
calm voice:
Grinding my sword wears down Mt. Paektu’s rock:
My horse gulps and dries the Tuman River.
Should a man at twenty fail to subdue the land,
Who will in later years call him a man of calibre?
My grandfather had explained to me that General Nam
distinguished himself in the battle against invaders from the north
and was promoted to the post of minister of the army at the age of
twenty. My grandfather encouraged me to become a general or a
commander of the vanguard when I was grown up, and to fight the
Japanese invaders. Hearing that General Nam was executed on the
basis of a false accusation against him by a treacherous subject, I
had lamented his death. I resolved to grow up to stand in the van of
the war, repulse invaders and fight for the security of my country
and my fellow people just as General Nam had done.
On the summit of Mt. Wangjae I pledged to myself: “As
General Nam repelled the invaders from the north by fighting on
the strong basis of the six forts on the northeastern frontier, so we
will spread the armed struggle deep into the homeland by drawing
on the support of the semi-guerrilla zone created around the six
54
towns, and will trap the Japanese imperialists and destroy them!”
The political workers and heads of revolutionary organizations
who assembled on the mountain reported to me the situation in the
homeland and the activities they had conducted.
I spoke words of encouragement to them, telling them that the
work of laying the mass foundations for the anti-Japanese
revolution was proceeding without a hitch in the northern frontier.
I also set them the task of developing the armed struggle and
extending it into the homeland.
In this question, I laid special emphasis on the task of
establishing the semi-guerrilla zone. We intended to establish
semi-guerrilla zones in the Onsong area and many other regions of
the homeland, secret rendezvous points and other bases for our
activities in the dense forests, and thus lay the cornerstone of the
armed struggle in the homeland.
The meeting on Mt. Wangjae discussed the task of rallying the
whole nation as a single political force under the banner of an antiJapanese national united front on the basis of a worker-peasant
alliance, as well as the task of the revolutionary organizations in
the homeland in speeding up the development of the mass
movement and the preparations for founding the party.
The guerrillas’ advance to the Onsong area was a prelude to the
spreading of the anti-Japanese armed struggle to the homeland,
and it marked a new milestone in the development of the national
liberation struggle. It demonstrated at home and abroad our
unshakable conviction in the view that the Korean communists had
55
an inalienable and inviolable right to fight for the Korean
revolution.
The advance of the anti-Japanese guerrillas to the Onsong area
and the meeting on Mt. Wangjae proved the correctness of our
policy of establishing semi-guerrilla zones around full-scale
guerrilla zones and in the homeland, and that the subjective and
objective conditions for the establishment of semi-guerrilla zones
in Jiandao and in the area of the six towns on the northern frontier
of Korea were mature.
After this meeting, we visited Ryuda Islet and Paksokgol in
Kyongwon (Saeppyol), and Kumsan Hill at Sinhung village in
Jongsong County and many other places in the homeland, where
we held meetings, gave short courses and conducted political
work, mainly for the purpose of teaching the political workers and
heads of revolutionary organizations in the homeland the
principles and methods of the underground revolutionary struggle.
In the homeland we frequently met with revolutionaries in order
to instil in them the Juche-orientated revolutionary line and
working methods, and help them to guide the complex practical
struggle with due care. The proper political and practical training
of the leaders of the revolutionary organizations and their hardcore
elements in the homeland was a prerequisite for success in the
creation of the semi-guerrilla zones.
The elites who had been sent on the mission of guiding the
revolutionary struggle in the homeland became active within the
very fabric of the country, in trade unions and peasants’
56
associations, which were concentrating their efforts on the
resistance against the Japanese, and they formed revolutionary
mass organizations in many parts of the country. These political
workers extended the network of their activity to Seoul and other
parts of southern Korea.
The party organizations formed in the area on the Tuman River
played a decisive role in establishing durable semi-guerrilla zones
around the six towns and in pushing forward the revolutionary
movement in the homeland.
Following this, the cadres in east Manchuria adopted our policy
on the establishment of semi-guerrilla zones, and set out to
implement this policy themselves. Some people denied the
correctness of our proposal and called it a Rightist deviation, but
they were refuted on the spot.
From the spring of 1933, strenuous efforts were made to
establish semi-guerrilla zones in the Soviet districts of east
Manchuria. Semi-guerrilla zones were established in wide areas–in
Luozigou, Dahuangwai, Zhuanjiaolou and Liangshuiquanzi in
Wangqing County, in Yanji, Hunchun, Antu and Helong. They
made a great contribution to the development of the anti-Japanese
armed struggle. Some full-scale guerrilla zones which were
unsuitable for defence were reorganized into semi-guerrilla zones.
Many of the village heads who had been appointed by the
puppet state of Manchukuo sympathized with us and supported us.
The area surrounding Luozigou, for instance, was completely
under our control, and nearly all of its inhabitants took our side.
57
The experience of the development of semi-guerrilla zones
proved valuable for the activities of the Korean People’s
Revolutionary Army in the Mt. Paektu area in the subsequent
years, and the validity of the policy was fully demonstrated
through these activities.
The semi-guerrilla zone had proved very effective, so when we
established our bases in the Mt. Paektu area on the Amnok River
in the latter half of the 1930s, we built secret camps only in the
places where the revolutionary army units were stationed, and
established semi-guerrilla zones elsewhere. We formed
revolutionary organizations among the masses, without defining
them as either “Red” or “White,” and we sent political workers to
them. We did not remain in one spot, but moved from place to
place, so as to prevent the enemy from discovering the base of our
operations. The semi-guerrilla zones produced many patriots such
as Jong Tong Chol, Ri Hun, Ri Ju Ik (Ri Chwi) and many others
from among the district heads, the heads of a hundred households
or ten households, sub-county chiefs, policemen and self-defence
corps men. In those days we planted clever men as our operatives
in the lowest administrative organs of the enemy. We also won
over many other junior officials, so that they supported the
revolution. During daylight, they pretended to work
enthusiastically for Manchukuo; at night, they helped us, guiding
the revolutionary army on the march, meeting operatives from the
revolutionary army to hand over information they had collected
during the day, and collecting goods to be sent to support the
58
revolutionary army. The semi-guerrilla zones established in east
Manchuria and Korea became reliable satellites which protected
the army and the people in the liberated areas and the people’s
government established there, as well as the achievements of the
struggle for democracy.
Drawing on the support of the full-scale guerrilla zones and the
semi-guerrilla zones which had been established in the vast area
surrounding the former, the anti-Japanese guerrillas penetrated
deep into the enemy-ruled area, revolutionized the masses, and
expanded the mass organizations as well as the vanguard
organizations of the party and Young Communist League. They
were thus able to strengthen the mass foundations of the antiJapanese armed struggle and switch from the defensive to the
offensive. As we went over to the offensive in the war against the
Japanese, we were able to break the enemy’s tight economic
blockade and find easier solutions to the problem of food, the
greatest headache in the life of the guerrilla zone.
The semi-guerrilla zones enabled us to overcome the Leftist
deviation that had discriminated between “Red” and “White”
territories and driven a large number of people over to the enemy
side, and also to rally broad sections of the population into a single
political force under the banner of the anti-Japanese national
united front. They also contributed greatly to the elimination of
flunkeyism and dogmatism, and the establishment of the principle
of Juche in the development of the Korean revolution.
Luozigou and Liangshuiquanzi were the most exemplary of all
59
the semi-guerrilla zones in the Wangqing area.
Ri Kwang rendered distinguished service in transforming
Luozigou into a semi-guerrilla zone. When he was dispatched
there, he built up strong footholds for us by working among the
soldiers of the anti-Japanese army of Chinese nationalists as well
as among people from the Independence Army.
Luozigou had been made a major base of the independence
movement led by Ri Tong Hwi and his group since the beginning
of the 1920s. The old people who had joined him in the
Independence Army movement had great influence in the area.
Under the auspices of these people, Ri Kwang was able to educate
and organize the inhabitants on revolutionary lines.
Many able political workers were sent to Luozigou to help
transform it into a semi-guerrilla zone. Some of them laid down
their lives. Choe Jong Hwa, who contributed greatly to the work of
revolutionizing Luozigou, was one who died there.
Pak Kil Song, an able detachment commander of the Korean
People’s Revolutionary Army, and Choe Kwang were working
underground at Luozigou in those days.
The enemy formed reactionary organizations such as the
concord society or cooperative society in that area and made
frantic efforts to stamp out the revolutionary forces, whereas we
formed large mass organizations like the Anti-Japanese
Association and united all the patriots. Luozigou also served as
food-supply base for the revolutionary masses of people in
Wangqing. Whenever there was a food crisis in the Xiaowangqing
60
guerrilla zone, messengers were sent to a revolutionary
organization in Luozigou to fetch emergency supplies. The
members of the revolutionary organization in Luozigou would
carry loads of cereal on their backs as far as Shimen at Shiliping
and deliver them to the people from Wangqing. Even after
Luozigou was occupied by the enemy, food was still carried from
there to liberated areas. It would be no exaggeration to say that,
from the latter half of 1935, when the guerrilla zone was disbanded
and the main force of the KPRA left on its expedition to north
Manchuria, the revolutionaries in Wangqing County survived by
eating food from Luozigou. Some of the revolutionary masses who
took refuge from the enemy’s “punitive” operations on the hill to
the west of Luozigou also ate the food from Luozigou during the
autumn and winter of 1935 as did the soldiers of the 3rd company
of Wangqing.
Luozigou became such an excellent source of food supplies for
the revolutionaries in Wangqing partly because the place was a
natural granary surrounded by fertile land, where even passing
beggars were welcomed to share meals of millet, but more
especially because many revolutionary organizations had taken
root there and given the inhabitants a good education.
Kim Ryong Un, a head of a hundred households in Luozigou, a
grassroots civil-servant who enjoyed the confidence of the
Manchukuo authorities, was a member of our organization. He
took advantage of his official position in order to help us
revolutionaries a great deal.
61
In order to prevent the guerrilla operatives from infiltrating into
the walled town and the people from maintaining secret contact
with the revolutionary army, the enemy strictly controlled the flow
of people going in and out of the town by posting young men on
guard at all times, while at the same time taking stringent measures
against the smuggling of food and consumer goods out of the
town. The guards were each equipped with a club, which served as
a sort of credential issued by the puppet state of Manchukuo.
When soldiers of the revolutionary army went to Luozigou to
obtain food, Kim Ryong Un used to select only young men under
our influence for guard duty. When the soldiers who had come for
food reached the town, the guards would hand over their clubs to
them, then run back to the head of a hundred households. Under
his direction they collected food and delivered it to the provisions
detail.
Members of revolutionary organizations in Luozigou would
coax soldiers of the puppet Manchukuo army into selling their
ammunition to them. One shop in the town was run by a
veteran of the Young Communist League. In order to obtain
goods to assist the revolutionary army, he swore an oath of
brotherhood with soldiers of the puppet Manchukuo army.
One puppet army soldier, who desperately loved money, would
buy things at low prices in various places and then ask the
shopkeeper to sell them for him at a high price. The soldier did this
because, if he were discovered selling things himself, he would be
punished. He swore brotherhood with the shopkeeper and even
62
sold him ammunition. The shopkeeper bought it at 25 fen a piece
and sent it on to the revolutionary army. As many as five thousand
cartridges were obtained in this way.
This is merely one simple instance proving the validity and
effectiveness of the semi-guerrilla zone.
The semi-guerrilla zone established around the village of
Liangshuiquanzi in the southern tip of the Wangqing area gave a
great support to the revolutionary army. The revolutionary
organizations in that village sent food and goods to the liberated
area on dozens of occasions.
In those years, we obtained much of our cereals, clothing,
matches, drugs, explosives, salt and other essentials required for
the guerrilla zone from the revolutionary organizations in Onsong
and Liangshuiquanzi.
Salt was the scarcest commodity in the guerrilla zone. Things
were so hard that we had to satisfy our craving for salt by putting a
tiny grain of it into our mouths after eating every five spoonfuls of
gruel. In order to make life impossible in the guerrilla zone, the
enemy used every conceivable means to stop food and salt finding
its way there. In autumn, the peasants were forced to bring all their
harvests into the stores of the concentration villages under the
enemy’s control, and then receive daily rations based on the
number of mouths in each household. The enemy knew that any
surplus food would find its way across into the guerrilla zone.
The enemy even went so far as to form anti-contraband squads,
the salt police, and have them make surprise searches of the
63
peasants’ houses. Any surplus of soy sauce and bean paste was
taxed, and the owners of the surplus were whipped with triangular
wooden sticks.
In the autumn of 1934, we sent a large group of people,
including 30 men from the 2nd company with horses, and even
some children, to Liangshuiquanzi to obtain salt.
It was 50 miles to the village and back from Wangqing.
Notified in advance of the salt operation, the revolutionary
organization of the village made piles of salt near the bank of the
Tuman River with the salt that they had obtained from the
underground revolutionary organizations in Onsong and the
Namyang shipping agency. They met the salt convoy near the
river.
The convoy loaded two to three sacks of salt on each of the
horses and carried them to Sancidao safely. The remainder was
transported to the guerrilla base, 20 to 30 kilograms on each man’s
back. Some of the salt was exchanged for flour at Luozigou.
Most of the supplies which the organization of Liangshuiquanzi
sent to us came from the six towns including Onsong on the
northern frontier of the homeland. The people there also obtained
many of the goods they sent to the guerrilla base from Tumen and
Longjing, because it was impossible to procure large amounts of
consumer goods in the homeland, which was under the enemy’s
strict surveillance and control. People in the organizations in the
homeland would cross the river in secret and travel to commercial
centres like Tumen and Longjing to buy essentials which were
64
later sent to anti-Japanese guerrilla bases through the appropriate
channels.
Tumen and Longjing were in effect our reliable sources of
supplies. For this reason, we seldom attacked such places as
Tumen, Longjing and Baicaogou, where many of our
revolutionary organizations were working underground. Once in
the early days of our guerrilla war, our comrades attacked
Baicaogou. Immediately after the raid, Ri Kwang’s father
informed us of the adverse effect the battle had on the rich people
whom he had intended to draw into the united front. He said they
had been frightened by the attack. From then on, we refrained from
attacking such places. The semi-guerrilla zones in the six towns
rendered historical and highly meritorious services to the survival
of the soldiers and civilians in Wangqing and other liberated areas.
We established a large number of concealed bases of activity in
the enemy-ruled areas, in addition to the full-scale guerrilla zones
and semi-guerrilla zones. These bases supported the military
actions and political activities of the guerrillas as well as providing
liaison links. The combination of underground revolutionary
organizations and liaison points provided a type of temporary and
mobile base, which was established in many large cities such as
Longjing, Hunchun, Tumen, Laotougou, and Baicaogou and along
the railways in the enemy area.
Whenever I recall the unforgettable days when the semiguerrilla zones were being established in Jiandao and in the
homeland, I remember O Jung Hwa, a man who made a most
65
powerful impression on me.
On his release from the Sodaemun prison in Seoul, O Jung Hwa
took a train bound for the north, stopped at his wife’s family home
in the vicinity of Huimudong for a few days to recuperate, and
then immediately returned to Shixian and came to see me.
His release and his reappearance in Wangqing were a great joy
and consolation to me at the time when I had just arrived in the
guerrilla zone from my expeditions to south and north Manchuria.
The first thing he asked for in the interview with me was a
major assignment. Judging from his unhealthy complexion, I
thought he needed a few months of convalescence, but since he
insisted on having something to do, I told him to establish a semiguerrilla zone in some part of the area around Gayahe.
District No. 5, in which he worked was adjacent to
Liangshuiquanzi, Tumen, Yanji, Baicaogou, Daduchuan and other
major bases of the enemy’s “punitive” forces, and in Gayahe there
was a substation of the Japanese consulate police. Liucaigou was
raided by the enemy early in January 1933, and later Sishuiping
was attacked twice by the “punitive” forces.
Though he had been released from prison, O Jung Hwa himself
was being shadowed by an enemy agent. But he could not conceal
his joy at the assignment he had received.
I gave him the assignment of establishing a semi-guerrilla
zone near Gayahe because the area was so close to the enemy’s
bases and also because the area was a frequent target of enemy
attack. The assignment was difficult and dangerous, but I had
66
every confidence in O Jung Hwa.
He had already made a strong impression upon me when I first
met him in the autumn of 1930, an impression that gave me
confidence in him. At that time I had a serious talk with him in his
own house. When I came out after the conversation, I found
several sturdy young men standing alertly on watch outside the
fence. Similar young men were also on guard at the entrance to the
village. These arrangements demonstrated his working ability and
his revolutionary attitude to me in a very powerful way.
His revolutionary prowess found brilliant expression in rallying
the masses to action.
As the first step towards giving the village a revolutionary
training, he obtained a pair of hair-clippers and formed a scissors
association which enlisted all the villagers. In those days, ordinary
barbers’ shops charged 15 fen for a haircut but O Jung Hwa
charged only five fen. He bought books with the money he earned
in this manner, and taught the members of the association how to
read and write. Interested in being able to read as well as in a
cheap haircut, people participated in the work of the association
with great enthusiasm. In this way O Jung Hwa educated the
villagers.
After providing them with the basics of enlightenment he
formed the Lingdong Friendship Association by merging the old
boys’ association, schoolmates’ association and friendship
association. The new friendship association was a legal
organization of young people and students in Dunhua and Yanji,
67
Hunchun, Helong and Wangqing–the localities situated to the east
of Haerbaling.
O Jung Hwa frequently prepared and produced dramatic
performances in order to give the villagers a revolutionary
training. When he wrote a script himself, his cousins, of whom
there were very many, would divide the parts among themselves,
make the scenery, direct their own performances and stage a
perfect show.
After inspiring the people with revolutionary enthusiasm in this
manner, O Jung Hwa first accepted his own family and relations
into the revolutionary organization, and then enlisted all the
villagers. Both before and after the winter meeting at Mingyuegou,
he and Kang Sang Jun, Jo Chang Dok and Yu Se Ryong helped
with the procurement of weapons, a fundamental task in the
preparations for the formation of the anti-Japanese guerrilla army.
The weapons they had captured from the enemy at the risk of their
lives were a significant contribution to the equipment of the
special detachment whose members included Choe In Jun, Han
Hung Gwon, Kang Sang Jun and Kim Un Sik. Just as we intended,
O Jung Hwa established an excellent semi-guerrilla zone in part of
district No. 5, the district which was first in the line of the enemy’s
attack. He also carried out in good faith the task of establishing
bases for activity in the enemy-held area. The Chonil Printing
Works in Tumen, which he transformed into a major base for our
activity, became the eyes and ears of the revolutionary army.
The enemy regarded O Jung Hwa and his family as a thorn in
68
his side, and was watching for a chance to eliminate them. In the
spring of 1933, a small guerrilla army group captured a secret
letter from the Japanese consulate in Longjing to their police
station in Shixian. It contained a directive ordering the killing of
the Os.
As soon as we learned of the secret instructions, we sent
guerrillas to save the family. The guerrillas swiftly evacuated all
31 of the Os to Shiliping.
In the summer of 1933, O Jung Hwa, who had fought
undauntedly and tirelessly every minute of all his life, always
racing about at the speed of a short-distance runner, was
unfortunately arrested by the enemy at a secret rendezvous in
Beifengwudong. He was murdered on the spot immediately he was
captured. We have no way of knowing what his last moments were
like or how he faced his death. The enemy agents who murdered
him and his comrades disappeared, leaving their vile deed as an
eternally unsolvable mystery.
When old man O Thae Hui came rushing to the scene of the
murder in furious haste from Shiliping, his son was lying, bloody
and battered, his eyes open, near the rendezvous. The eyeballs, in
which the spark of life still lingered, reflected the blue sky of the
guerrilla zone on which he used to gaze with such fondness when
alive.
But the mouth was closed more tightly than in his life. From the
sight of it the old man knew that his son had not betrayed the
secret of the organization in order to save his life. The heroism of
69
this death only grieved the old man all the more. “You have lived a
life of only 34 years, but it was an honourable life. A long life does
not always mean happiness. But you have left me too soon! How
heart-rending your death will be to General Kim Il Sung, who
treasured you so much!” The old man thought as he held his dead
son in his arms.
I could not believe that he was dead. How could it be that a man
who had talked and walked so much, and achieved so much in his
work, living like a blazing fire, should die so quietly?
No one was with him at the moment of his death. He was left
lying there on the ground, leaving not a single word of behest. If
he had had something to tell me what would it have been? He
might well have asked me to give him another assignment, since
the semi-guerrilla zone was already established.
If he had lived, I would have entrusted him with greater
responsibility. According to the revolutionary ethics, entrusting a
man with many assignments is an expression of the greatest love
and the greatest possible confidence in him.
Our revolution had lost yet another distinguished organizer and
propagandist, a man who was loved by everyone in Jiandao,
another loyal and stalwart pillar and support, who had inspired the
people with pride and struck terror into the heart of the enemy. It
was a heart-rending blow struck just at the moment when our
revolution was surging ahead in east Manchuria.
O Jung Hwa had awakened the revolutionary consciousness of
the masses and roused them to action by sacrificing himself.
70
Though he was gone, new heroes sprang up like bamboo shoots
after the rain in the soil of the semi-guerrilla zones where his blood
had been spilt, heroes who would carry the great war against the
Japanese imperialists to ever greater heights.
71
3. The Choice between the Soviet and the
People’s Revolutionary Government
Leftist abuses were most rampant in the establishment of
structures of political power, and Leftist deviation in the building
of political power found its most glaring expression in the line of
building the Soviet and in some of its policies, which were the
products of the petty bourgeois rashness of people steeped in
dogmatism, sycophancy and adventurism.
Political power had been a major subject of discussion among
us from the days of the Down-with-Imperialism Union, a subject
which nobody had ever ignored. Some people contended that the
question of power was a question for the future, which could be
taken up by the young people of Korea after the country became
independent, the question of a concept of government the
construction of which could wait until the sovereignty of the state
was restored. We were not in agreement with this view,
maintaining that views on the correct form of government directly
affected the nature of the revolution which was to be carried out.
72
While we were in Jilin political power was the subject of
extremely heated argument. There was hardly a political forum in
Jilin that did not discuss the type of state to be established after the
country became independent. While the leaders of the
Independence Army who were affiliated with the three nationalist
organizations vehemently supported royalist government or
bourgeois republicanism, politicians who had belonged to the old
Korean Communist Party such as Kim Chan, An Kwang Chon and
Sin Il Yong advocated the immediate introduction of socialism and
a proletarian dictatorship.
Pak So Sim adhered to the classic schema and argued over the
question of a worker-peasant dictatorship. He supported the idea of
the workers and peasants becoming the masters of state power, but
he shook his head, saying that he did not like the word
“dictatorship.”
Differences in the degree of their political awareness and their
interests led some of the young people in Jilin to express their
support for royalist government, while some had a lingering
interest in bourgeois republicanism and others applauded the
Soviet Union’s type of socialism.
Kim Hyok, Cha Kwang Su, Kye Yong Chun, Sin Yong Gun
and other communists of the younger generation did not like the
old men of the Independence Army who spoke out for the
restoration of royalist government. They also had doubts about the
proponents of immediate socialism.
This state of affairs obliged us to engage in heated polemics
73
about political power as a major question in the students and
young people’s forum, which dealt mainly with political affairs.
Later, at the meeting held in Kalun, we defined the nature of the
Korean revolution as anti-imperialist, anti-feudal and democratic.
On this basis, we emphasized that the Korean communists must
establish a political system for the people in liberated Korea, a
democratic government which would champion the interests of the
broad working masses including the workers, peasants, working
intellectuals, national capitalists and religious believers, and would
reject royalist government or bourgeois parliamentarism.
We maintained essentially the same position when the question
of power was discussed at the meeting held in Mingyuegou in
December 1931.
With the establishment of guerrilla bases in the Jiandao area,
the type of political power to be established became the subject of
wide-scale discussion. In order to maintain and administer those
guerrilla zones which were liberated areas, it was necessary to set
up a government which would organize the economic activities of
the people, educate them and develop culture in the area under its
jurisdiction. Without establishing a government in the guerrilla
zones, which were the embryo of a state, it would be impossible to
provide the people with a livelihood and mobilize them in the
struggle.
From the autumn of 1932, therefore, the communists in east
Manchuria undertook the historic task of establishing the
government in the guerrilla zones. On the occasion of the
74
anniversary of the October Revolution in the same year, a mass
meeting was held in Gayahe, Wangqing County, and the
establishment of a Soviet government was proclaimed. Almost
simultaneously, Soviet power was established in Wangougou and
Sandaowan in Yanji County. The establishment of the
revolutionary government in the guerrilla zones must be regarded
as a significant step towards realizing the people’s cherished
desire.
In its initial stage, I, too, was pleased at the establishment of
Soviet power in the guerrilla zones. I considered that the name of
the government was not important as long as the government
championed the people’s interests.
In those days “Soviet enthusiasm” was sweeping throughout
east Manchuria. The establishment of Soviet power was
recognized as a historical trend by revolutionaries and progressive
people in all countries which aspired to socialism and communism.
This hot wind swept through Europe and Asia. The establishment
of the Chinese Soviet in Ruijin and of the Nghe Tinh Soviet in
Vietnam are clear examples.
Even those who regarded the Korean revolution as a bourgeois
democratic revolution spoke about a worker-peasant Soviet
government.
The “Action Programme of the Communist Party of Korea”
which had been drafted by Choe Song U, a Korean, and other
people working at the Comintern headquarters, in cooperation with
the officials in charge of the Oriental Department of the Executive
75
Committee of the Comintern (Kuusinen, Magyar and Okano),
proposed the immediate task of “establishing a Soviet state of
workers and peasants,” along with the complete independence of
Korea.
Unconditional support and acceptance of the Soviet line in
revolutionary practice was a matter of common sense beyond
dispute in the international communist movement and was
regarded as a criterion for distinguishing between the stances of
communist revolution and opportunism. The establishment of a
Soviet government was regarded as the most important task by the
communist parties and communist organizations in capitalist
countries, to say nothing of the colonies and semi-colonial
countries. In fact, Soviet power became the ideal of the entire
world proletariat.
The Soviet idea was so very influential because it was
recognized as the only type of government capable of putting an
end to all manner of exploitation and oppression and building a
welfare society that would regard the interests of the working
masses as absolute.
A free and peaceful new world without exploitation and
oppression was the age-long dream and ideal of humanity.
The newborn Soviet government in Russia had proved its
unprecedented effectiveness in suppressing the insurrection of the
overthrown exploiting class, defending the country from the
invasion of allied imperialist forces, rehabilitating the economy,
and pressing forward with the building of socialism. The
76
triumphant advance of Soviet socialism aroused an admiration
among the people which was little short of belief in an illusion.
It was by no means unreasonable for mankind to regard the
Soviet Union as a beacon-light and accept the Soviet as the best
and most advanced of all forms of government. It was natural that
the people of Jiandao, which was adjacent to the Soviet Union and
subject to its influence in many ways, should be swayed by
illusions about Soviet power.
On my return to Wangqing from the campaigns in south and
north Manchuria, I was dumbfounded at the complaints against the
Soviet policy that could be heard in all parts of the guerrilla zone.
These complaints indicated serious problems that we could not
overlook.
I saw instantly that the rumours spread by disgruntled people
contained some truth.
As I travelled around the guerrilla zone, I learned about the
people’s attitude towards Soviet power in greater detail. My
constant contacts and candid conversations with hundreds of
people gave me a full picture of the consequences of Leftist Soviet
policy.
The inhabitants of the guerrilla zone began to be disillusioned
by Soviet power from the time when the government, following
the slogan of the immediate introduction of socialism, proclaimed
the abolition of private property, and brought all personal property
and real estate under communal ownership. Everything was
communalized, from land and provisions to the farming tools and
77
implements such as sickles, hoes and pitchforks that had belonged
to individual peasants. After this sweeping introduction of
communal ownership, the Soviet government subjected all the
inhabitants of the guerrilla zone–men and women, young and old–
to the new order of communal life, communal labour and
communal distribution. This was the life of the artel proclaimed
by the Soviet radicals.
This policy amounted to sending kindergarten children to
university without giving them primary and secondary education.
The Soviet government also expropriated, without compensation,
all the rich farmers and landowners, regardless of whether they
were large landowners, small landowners, pro-Japanese
landowners or anti-Japanese landowners, and even confiscated
their cattle, horses and provisions.
Those landowners who remained in the guerrilla zone even after
the land of east Manchuria had been divided into “Red territory”
and “White territory,” were in general patriotic and strongly
opposed to the Japanese. They gave enthusiastic support to the
guerrilla army when the communists were raising an army in
Wangqing.
One of those progressive landowners was a Chinese named
Zhang Shi-ming. At the time of its large-scale “punitive” invasion,
in the spring of 1932, the Japanese Jiandao task force even burnt
down his grain store. Even though the “punitive” forces ordered a
forced evacuation at bayonet-point, Zhang Shi-ming remained in
the guerrilla zone, instead of moving to Daduchuan. His previous
78
grievances against the Japanese were augmented that spring.
Landowner though he was, he had given unstinting material and
moral support to the people in the guerrilla zone.
“Officers and men from the guerrilla army,” he would say to the
guerrillas who came to him for contributions. “I am remaining here
in this valley because I hate to see the Japanese. Please at least
drive them away from Daduchuan!”
The people in the guerrilla zone were on good terms with him.
But the Soviet government drove even this landowner away to
the enemy-ruled area. He pleaded with the Soviet government for
permission to live in the guerrilla zone, but the Soviet rejected his
request.
“The Soviet government has decided to expropriate the property
of all landowners,” the Soviet informed him. “It is true that your
anti-Japanese spirit is strong and you have given generous support
to the work of the guerrilla zone, but you are a member of the
exploiting class, and we are obliged to eliminate you. Leave this
place quickly.”
All the property of this landowner who had given wholehearted
support to the revolution was confiscated there and then and put
into a storehouse which was at the disposal of the Soviet
government. The beggared landowner left in tears to go to
Daduchuan, where the Japanese forces were stationed.
Those who obeyed the order to carry out a purge at that time
even took the children’s flower-patterned shoes from the chests at
landowners’ houses. The Chinese people had an interesting custom
79
according to which, when a female baby was born to them, they
prepared the shoes for the children the female baby would have
when she grew and married. Such shoes were called “flowerpatterned shoes.” They used to make shoes of various sizes for
babies younger than one year, for one-year olds, two-year olds and
so on upwards, and then store them in chests. The chests contained
some shoes as small as thimbles.
Having meekly allowed even these shoes to be taken away,
what thoughts would these landlords carry with them as they left
the guerrilla zone?
The valley of Xiaowangqing was crowded with cattle and
horses that had been confiscated from propertied people. There
were more than enough of them to stock a sizable farm, and every
young person in the guerrilla zone went about on horseback. It was
what one might call a fashion under Soviet rule.
The Leftist elements even regarded Chinese women’s customs
of wearing earrings and wrapping their feet tight to check their
growth as evils to be combatted.
During the first half of the 1930s, Leftist abuses were rampant
in east Manchuria, and this Leftist tyranny subjected the sacred
revolutionary principles to a severe test. How did this Leftist wind
come to sweep the whole of east Manchuria? Were all the
revolutionaries in the guerrilla zones in Jiandao hooligans or
lunatics?
No. The overwhelming majority of the communists who were
administering the guerrilla zone were good people with noble
80
revolutionary ideals and warm hearts.
They loved people and nourished the aspiration to justice more
warmly than others. How was it, then, that these sympathetic and
discreet people committed the irretrievable error of advocating and
implementing this Leftist policy?
We identified the cause in the policy itself and in the
ideological immaturity of the people who had determined the line.
These absurdities in revolutionary practice were produced by the
unrealistic directives issued by people at the top of the hierarchy
who, in ignorance of specific circumstances, aped the ill-digested
principles of the classics and lessons of earlier experience.
In those years, the blind rejection of people, indiscriminate
elimination, overthrow and ostracism were considered to be in
keeping with a thoroughgoing class approach, the qualities of the
most advanced revolutionaries.
The instance of a widow who lent at a small rate of interest the
money she had earned by weaving cloth by hand was labelled as a
usurer, so that her promissory note was thrown into fire and even
her capital confiscated by some peasants in Wangqing, shows what
a sacred cow this Leftist practice had become. Unless they were
misled by some of their leaders, the simple peasants could not
have resorted to such absurdities.
Once I was surprised to hear how a company commander, Ri
Ung Man, had joined the guerrilla army in Wangqing.
In the early days of recruiting, only people from the working
class, poor peasantry and hired farm hands were admitted to the
81
armed ranks. Ri Ung Man’s father had owned a little more than
three hectares of sterile hillside land, so he had not been
considered a poor peasant. He had applied to join the ranks more
than once, but his earnest requests had been turned down because
he came from an undesirable family. He had been told that a man
with more than three hectares was a middle peasant.
After many days of mental torture, he had sold his father’s land
without his parents’ knowledge, bought a box of Browning pistols,
and taken it to the armed group, begging to be admitted. Only then
had he been accepted. He was glad that he had become a guerrilla,
but his family was at a loss, left without any means of livelihood.
My resolve to combat Leftist evils grew still firmer after I
moved to Jiandao. I have been combatting them all my life ever
since. My experience in those days has been of great help in my
postliberation struggle to counter Leftist evils and eliminate
bureaucratic tendencies.
Under the cloak of slick revolutionary phrases and ultra-party
slogans, the Leftists continually mock the masses, abuse and
deceive them, in pursuit of their own glory and advancement.
From these selfish motives, they depict themselves as tanks or
armoured vehicles advancing in the forefront of struggle. Thus
counterrevolutionaries make use of the cloak of Leftism. So all
communists must always be highly vigilant and not allow the
Leftists to get a foothold in their camp.
The Leftist Soviet policy plunged the guerrilla bases into a state
of vacillation and confusion which was difficult to rectify. A large
82
number of families, disillusioned and discontented with the Soviet
policy, departed for enemy-ruled territory.
One night, on our way to Sancidao where Choe Chun Guk, the
political instructor of the 2nd company, was working, my men and
I met a middle-aged man and his family who were fleeing from the
guerrilla zone. The man was leaving by night for fear of being
labelled a counterrevolutionary if he was caught travelling in
daylight. The five members of his family were carrying a few
bundles or almost empty-handed. The three children were helped
by their parents as they hobbled along.
The man, who looked about 50, trembled at the sight of our
armed group. He seemed struck with dismay at having been
discovered by a guerrilla commander.
“Have you done anything wrong?” I asked in a gentle voice,
drawing the three shivering children to me one by one.
“No, nothing.”
“Why, then, are you leaving the guerrilla zone?”
“It is too hard to live here....”
“Where are you going, then? Things will be even worse in the
enemy area, won’t they?”
“We have been living here because we couldn’t endure the
Japanese atrocities, so why should we go back to them? We are
going deeper into the mountains to live by slashing and burning
the land where no one will disturb our peace.”
At his words my heart felt weary with oppression. I wondered if
they could find the peace of mind they sought in a deeper recess of
83
the mountain than Macun, a recess which offered no guarantee of a
livelihood in the days to come.
“The thaw has not yet set in, have you food enough to last until
it does?” I asked.
“No. We shall live as long as we can, and we may die.... That’s
all there is to it. My very life is a nuisance to me now.”
As she listened to him, the sobs of the man’s wife shook her
shoulders. The three children who were in my arms also burst into
tears.
I fought back my own tears as I was standing blankly in the
darkness. If all the people left one by one in this manner, on whom
could we rely in making the revolution? Why had our revolution
entered this dead end? The consequences of the reckless Soviet
policy had been too destructive.
“Things will be put to rights soon. So don’t feel too
discouraged. Let’s wait till things are smoothed over.”
I sent him and his family back home with an escort of my men.
I changed my plan of staying overnight in the barracks of the 2nd
company and called on old man Choe Ja Ik at Xidapo. The heartrending incident of the miserable family prompted me to try to dig
into the depths of the people’s minds. Choe Ja Ik was the father of
Choe In Jun, who, after joining the Wangqing special detachment,
had been promoted to company commander and then to regimental
commander of an independent brigade before he fell in battle.
Whenever I visited Sancidao, I had paid a call on Choe Ja Ik.
Being a well-informed man, he had even served as secretary of
84
the northern political and military administration headed by So Il.
Moreover, he was open-minded and candid, and told me many
instructive things whenever I met him.
“Old man, how are you getting along these days?” I greeted
him.
“I think I am living just because I am alive,” he said bluntly in
reply to my greetings.
Believing that his intonation expressed the people’s mind, I
asked again, “Is your life in the guerrilla zone so hard?”
At this question, the old man flew into a rage and began to
grumble, saying:
“I put up with the Soviet government when it took away my
work animals and farm implements. I guessed that we were
following the example of collective farming in Russia, for which
the Russians had collected such things. But when I saw the people
from the Soviet collecting spoons and chopsticks a few days ago
for what they called a communal eating house, I spat at them. I
said, ‘Shall we old people leave our under-floor-heated rooms and
walk to and from the public eating house in the cold weather three
times every day? I cannot live in this manner any longer. If you are
going to create a hell and call it a kommuna or artel, do it
yourselves, young men. We are already out of breath and can’t
keep up with you any longer.’ And then there was what they called
the purge of feudalism, when old people were subjected to
criticism by their daughters-in-law at mass meetings. Has anything
so ridiculous ever happened in the five-thousand-year-long history
85
of our country? And still, my son, In Jun, told me not to slander
the Soviet. So I was going to break his back.”
If the father of a commander of the guerrilla army could spat on
Soviet policy, there was clearly no need to probe the attitude of
other people any further.
Later, during the terrible days of the ultra-Leftist struggle
against the “Minsaengdan,” and during the sad days when the
soldiers and the people were bidding a tearful farewell to one
another prior to the break-up of the guerrilla zones, I often recalled
the old man lamenting over the things that were happening,
pounding his breast with his fists, at the time when I met him.
Less than half a year after the establishment of the Soviet
government, the relations between the Korean and Chinese peoples
had deteriorated again. Most of the landowners who had been
expropriated were Chinese, so it was natural that a situation similar
to one at the time of the May 30 Uprising should recur. The
Chinese nationalist army, which was opposed to the Japanese,
once again became hostile to the Korean communists. The national
salvation army and Chinese landowners were now our enemies, in
addition to the Japanese and Manchukuo armies.
The anti-Japanese guerrilla army found itself once again in the
restricted circumstances of the days of its establishment, when its
small units had to hide in the back-rooms of other people’s houses.
The guerrillas once again had to be billeted cautiously on Korean
settlements. It was quite impossible to rename ourselves as
Chinese special detachments. Whenever they met us, the national
86
salvation army units would attack us, calling us “gaolibangzi” (a
Chinese derogatory term for the Koreans–Tr.). Guerrilla activity
was effectively reduced to a semi-underground struggle.
Everything that had been built up by our year-long struggle was
being brought to nought.
Our comrades began to develop divergent opinions of Soviet
policy. Some of them said that, since things had come to this, we
should go to Russia to learn the methods of revolution and then
make a fresh start; some of them insisted that, since the way the
people in Jiandao were doing things would make a mess of the
revolution, we should return to our own ground and fight in our
own way; and another man let slip that it would be better to go
home and fulfil his filial duty to his parents than to fight for
something which was not much like a revolution. The Chinese
comrade who wished to go home was allowed to do so, and
another Chinese comrade who wished to study in the Soviet Union
was sent there.
Even in this state of affairs, the people in charge of the guerrilla
zone could not bring themselves to change their policy. The east
Manchuria ad hoc committee which was in a position of leadership
had no defined line of its own with which to amend the policy of
the Comintern.
Somebody had to smooth over this chaotic situation and save
the guerrilla zone from collapse, even at the risk of being
stigmatized as a Rightist. This task required determination and the
formulation of new theses capable of countering the Leftist Soviet
87
line. It was about this time that I wrote a thesis on eliminating
factionalism and strengthening the unity of the revolutionary ranks
and published it in a pamphlet.
I had made up my mind to take issue with Tong Chang-rong at
Macun over the type of government to be established. However,
county party secretary Ri Yong Guk and a few others dissuaded
me from doing so. They said it would be useless to argue with him
because the “Decision of the East Manchuria ad hoc Committee on
the Great Programme of Building the Soviet” had already been
issued to its subordinate units and a Soviet government had been
established at Sishuiping. They even warned me that if the
argument went the wrong way, I might be punished. Ri Yong Guk
told me briefly how Kim Paek Ryong had been charged as a
Rightist because of his careless criticism of the Soviet.
Kim Paek Ryong was working as a member of a county party
committee in north Manchuria. At the time when propaganda was
at its height prior to the formation of the Soviet in Jiandao, he
came, by way of the east Manchuria ad hoc committee, to
Wangqing district No. 5, which had been selected as the first
demonstration unit for the establishment of the Soviet government.
When he heard that a Soviet government was going to be set up
in the district, he said that it was premature to have it in east
Manchuria. Because of this single statement, he had been
stigmatized as a Right opportunist and became the target of active
measures. The incident ended with his escape to north Manchuria.
In the winter of 1934, two years after I heard the story of his
88
case from Ri Yong Guk, I met Kim Paek Ryong at Badaohezi,
Ningan County. At the time he was the secretary of the district
party committee.
He recollected with sadness the incident in the autumn of 1932
in which he had been branded as a Rightist capitulator because of
his statement that a Soviet government was premature. By the time
I met him, the Leftist Soviet policy had been rectified, and the
people’s revolutionary government had long been administering
the guerrilla zone, so he did not hesitate to criticize the proponents
of the reckless, Leftist Soviet line. In my talk with him I found him
an extremely intelligent and upright man.
I asked him why he had said that it was premature to establish
the Soviet.
“The reason is simple,” Kim Paek Ryong replied. “When I was
in Gayahe, I talked with a lot of peasants and found that they did
not even know the meaning of the word Soviet. So I said it was
premature to create a Soviet which was beyond the people’s
comprehension.”
In fact, the people in those days did not understand the meaning
of the word, and this fact indicated their lack of preparedness.
The old people in Gayahe who participated in the election to the
district Soviet took the word “Soviet” to mean soksaepho
(automatic gun–Tr.).
“I watched the platform after the election,” one of them
remarked, “for I had been expecting automatic guns from the
Soviet, the guns that would kill many Japanese. But it produced
89
only a red flag.”
Some of the people from Macun, who attended the ceremony
for the establishment of the Soviet at Wangqing district No. 2,
mistook the word “Soviet” for soebochi (tin pail–Tr.). Another
villager was said to have asked voters to take a close look at the
Soviet and see whether it was large or small. Some other villagers
were said to have gone out with baskets to gather wild vegetables,
because they had nothing special to offer the Soviet, an important
guest.
These subjective interpretations of the meaning of the word or
comical mistakes were due, of course, to the people’s ignorance,
and in particular to ineffective propaganda on the part of their
leaders. The titles of public lectures, for instance, were full of
loanwords such as Soviet, kolkhoz and kommuna which were
beyond the people’s comprehension. As for the Soviet itself, the
propagandists themselves had no clear idea of what it was.
After the establishment of Soviet power everywhere, the radical
elements who had been poisoned with Leftist ideas swaggered
about, shouting loudly about the dictatorship of the working class,
poor peasants and hired farm hands, as if the revolution had
already been carried through.
In spite of the advice of the comrades at Wangqing, I did
challenge Tong Chang-rong to a debate about the appropriate form
of government.
“The birth of the revolutionary government in Jiandao and its
proclamation is an event to rejoice at. But, Comrade Tong Chang-
90
rong, I cannot remain a silent onlooker when our policy of the
united front is being encroached upon by the Soviet line.”
Tong Chang-rong looked at me in surprise.
“It is being encroached upon? What do you mean by that?” he
asked.
“As I told you at Mingyuegou, we have adopted the line of
rallying all the patriotic, anti-Japanese forces, who are interested in
our revolution, into a strong political force, and we have striven to
implement this line at the cost of our blood in the homeland and
Manchuria over the past years. In the course of this struggle, we
have united many people, including patriotic believers,
shopkeepers and manufacturers, junior officials and even
landowners. But the Soviet policy has rejected them all
indiscriminately. Until yesterday, they supported or sympathized
with the revolution, but now they turn away from it or are opposed
to it. The relations between the Korean and Chinese peoples have
been aggravated once again.”
Tong Chang-rong smiled, patting me on the wrist.
“That is quite possible, but it is not a matter of great
importance. What is important is that the Soviet government has
met all the requirements of the people. The revolution is
triumphing. The workers and peasants, the vast majority of the
masses, are following the Soviet government. What is there to be
afraid of? I believe that, with the support of the workers and
peasants, we can carry out whatever revolution we need. We have
to be prepared to lose a minority, don’t we?”
91
“I admit that there may be losses. But why should we reject
people who can be won over? Our general strategy is to isolate the
enemy as far as possible and win over as many people as possible.
That is why we have risked our lives working among the antiJapanese nationalist forces over the past year. We communists
have managed to recover the prestige that was damaged by the
May 30 Uprising, and we have resolved the discord between the
Korean and Chinese peoples by dint of painstaking effort. But now
there is the danger again that the results of these great efforts may
be brought to nothing overnight.”
“Comrade Kim Il Sung, surely you are too pessimistic?”
“No. I am in the habit of always looking on the bright side. The
revolution will, of course, continue its victorious advance. But,
Comrade Tong Chang-rong, I cannot help being deeply worried
about the negative consequences of the Leftist policy in east
Manchuria. I believe that the party in east Manchuria must give
prudent consideration to this matter.”
“So you mean that the policy should be reconsidered?”
“Yes, the policy should be reconsidered as well as the form of
government that shapes the policy.”
Tong Chang-rong frowned disapprovingly and then said,
“Comrade Kim Il Sung, there may indeed be errors in the policy of
the Soviet government, but the form of the government is
inviolable. The policy concerning the establishment of Soviet
power comes from the centre.”
The argument continued.
92
He persisted in his opinion, describing the Soviet as an
absolute. He was a man of moderate character and kind heart, but a
die-hard.
He was well-informed, but dogmatic in his thinking and practice.
We resumed the argument on another day, when the point at
issue was whether to maintain the Soviet or abandon it, and if it
was to be discarded, what form of a new government should be
adopted.
I said that, since life had proved that the Soviet was not suited
to the guerrilla zone in east Manchuria where the task of antiimperialist, anti-feudal democratic revolution should be addressed,
the Korean and Chinese communists must resolutely change the
form of government, and adopt a policy capable of meeting the
requirements of the people in order to calm down the chaotic
situation.
In reply to my cogent argument, Tong Chang-rong said, “I, too,
admit that the Soviet does not suit the specific situation of east
Manchuria and that some of its political measures have resulted in
losses to the revolution. I now understand why the other day you
expressed your apprehension concerning the united-front line
being encroached upon by the Soviet line. Comrade Kim Il Sung,
the grave developments in east Manchuria in recent months have
compelled me to give serious consideration to your warning. To
our regret, however, we have not yet decided on a form of
government that can replace the Soviet.”
I was pleased by this change in the opinion of the secretary of
93
the ad hoc committee. He was no longer the same die-hard who
had insisted that the Soviet was the only type of government for
the communists at the high tide of revolution when the masses
were in buoyant spirits.
“The Commune and the Soviet are the only forms of workingclass government that mankind has ever discovered, aren’t they?”
Tong Chang-rong asked, and gazed at me. His eyes seemed to
suggest that, if I had a form that might convince him, he would not
choose to object to it.
“If that is so, then let us make up a suitable one for ourselves,” I
said.
“For ourselves? I’m afraid that I’m not such a great genius.
How can we make up things that are not mentioned in Marx’s
classic works?”
I could not agree with this view or attitude which regarded
things as immutable and absolute, from which one could not
deviate.
“Comrade Tong Chang-rong, did the French working class refer
to any classics when they created the Commune? Was the Russian
Soviet proposed by the founders of Marxism in their classic
works? How can you regard the Soviet as the brainchild of a
genius? If the people had not required it, if the Russian situation
had not required it, I think the Soviet would not have emerged in
the arena of history.”
Without giving any sign of what he thought, Tong Chang-rong
produced a large tobacco pouch from his pocket, filled his pipe
94
and set it between his lips, then offered the pouch to me. He used
to carry the tobacco pouch and the pipe in his hand while
inspecting the guerrilla zone. When he met a peasant on the way
he would fill the pipe and then offer it to the peasant. He was a
man of peculiar character, and this simplicity of his won him love
and respect from the people in the guerrilla zone. In winter he went
about in a fur cap like those worn by local peasants.
His silence vexed me, but the fact that he refrained from further
argument was a good omen.
Following my conversation with him, I met Ri Yong Guk, Kim
Myong Gyun, Jo Chang Dok and some other military and political
cadres, and discussed with them the question of replacing the
Soviet with a new revolutionary government. We debated the
matter seriously for several days.
For purposes of a smooth discussion, we emphasized the
importance of a criterion for defining the form of the government.
I asserted that we must not make the criterion too complicated,
and that, since we were all fighting for the people and were their
faithful servants, determined to dedicate all our lives to their cause,
we must draw the criterion from the character of our revolution at
that stage, laying emphasis on whether the government we were
going to establish would be able to champion the interests of all
sections of the population and whether it would enjoy their
enthusiastic support.
On hearing this, my comrades cheered, saying that everything
was now clear to them, that a government which was to champion
95
the interests of all sections of the population must be a united-front
government, since the term “all sections of the population” would
mean not only the workers and poor or hired peasants, but other
broad sections of the people, that a united-front government would
suit the character of the anti-imperialist, anti-feudal democratic
revolution, and that they would welcome such a government with
open arms.
I again emphasized that the united-front government must be a
people’s revolutionary government based on a worker-peasant
alliance. Nowadays, this is known in the history books as the line
on the establishment of the people’s revolutionary government.
There is no need to mention the result of our vote, for they
believed that the form of people’s revolutionary government we
chose suited to east Manchuria, where Koreans were the
overwhelming majority of the inhabitants, was ideally suited to the
character of the Korean revolution which was directed at
democracy and against imperialism and feudalism, and that it met
the requirements of the people. We discovered the criterion for the
form of government in the people’s requirements and in a means
of championing and representing the people’s interests.
After deciding on the form of government, we agreed to set an
example in one district and, if the result was accepted as good, to
extend the example to other revolutionary districts. District No. 5
was chosen as the unit in which to set an example.
Ri Yong Guk, Kim Myong Gyun and I visited Wangqing
district No. 5 and attended the meeting to elect the district
96
committee of the people’s revolutionary government. The meeting
was held at the village of Xiamudan, two and half a miles away
from Sishuiping. The day was the anniversary of the MOPR, a
Russian acronym for the International Organization for Assisting
Revolutionaries. The Executive Committee of the Comintern
decided in 1923 to establish this organization for the purpose of
assisting the families of revolutionary martyrs, and set March 18 as
the international anniversary of the MOPR.
Jo Chang Dok, chairman of the fifth district Soviet government,
showed us into the office of the Soviet, where I talked to about 20
peasants from Gayahe.
“We have decided to set up a new government to replace the
Soviet government. It must represent your will. What kind of
government would you like to set up?” I asked.
An old man rose and answered, “If the government to be set up
will make our life easier, we’ll ask for nothing more.”
I declared excitedly that a people’s revolutionary government
would be established in place of the Soviet government, and that
the new government would be the first genuine people’s
government in the world history of political power.
“This government will represent and champion the interests of
all the people who love their country and their fellow people. It
will fulfil their most cherished desires. What are your cherished
desires? The people’s revolutionary government will fulfil all of
your desires to own land, to have the right to work, to educate your
children, and to have equality for all.”
97
The people from Gayahe fully supported the line of the people’s
revolutionary government which I explained to them.
Prior to the ceremony to proclaim the establishment of the
people’s revolutionary government, we saw to it that all
expropriated private property was returned to the former owners.
In order to compensate for what had been damaged or consumed
after expropriation, Ryang Song Ryong even organized an armed
raid on a lumber station. The cattle and horses captured from the
enemy in that battle were used by the peasants to cultivate the land
distributed to them in the spring of that year.
At the meeting I made a speech to the effect that the people’s
revolutionary government was truly a people’s government, and
then the government’s ten-point programme was announced.
This programme was later incorporated almost without
amendment into the Ten-point Programme of the Association for
the Restoration of the Fatherland.
Still vivid in my memory is the image of the county party
secretary, Ri Yong Guk, during the meeting at the village in
Sishuiping. While everyone was enjoying themselves dancing
together, he sat in a corner, shedding tears.
I slipped away from the dancing party and walked over to him.
“Comrade Secretary, why are you sad when everyone is
dancing?”
Without even attempting to dry the tears trickling down his
cheeks, Ri Yong Guk heaved a deep sigh.
“I can’t see why these people do not spit at me. The Wangqing
98
people have suffered from Leftist evils entirely because of me. But
they thanked me. Commander Kim, you are the man who should
receive thanks from them.”
“Our people are generous and good-natured. The fact that
instead of settling accounts with you the people thanked you,
Secretary, means that they have accepted the line of the people’s
revolutionary government wholeheartedly. From now onwards, let
us give our minds only to the future.”
“I have not been living in my right mind, but in some other
man’s. You have opened my eyes to a truth of genuine value. Let
us live for the people! What profound meaning there is in this
simple motto! I will remember it all my life,” Ri Yong Guk firmly
resolved, squeezing my hand.
He was not able to live up to his pledge, for the east Manchuria
ad hoc committee dismissed him from his post of secretary of the
county party committee. The ad hoc committee said that Ri Yong
Guk was dismissed because he had belonged to the M-L group and
the Wangqing county party committee was guilty of an ultraLeftist error in implementing the Soviet line. It also said that he
was suspected of having been involved in the case of the
“Minsaengdan.”
The charge that Ri Yong Guk had belonged to the M-L group
was not true. When involved in youth work at Xilinhe he had been
recommended for the post of secretary of the Young Communist
League under the east Manchuria ad hoc committee by a man who
had been involved in the M-L group. That was all. It was
99
unreasonable and immoral that the secretary of the county party
committee was alone held responsible for all the evils resulting
from the ultra-Leftist Soviet line. If Ri Yong Guk had deserved the
punishment of dismissal, then what punishment should have been
meted out to the people who had imposed the Soviet line upon
their subordinates and the men who had forced him to implement
the line?
The charge that Ri Yong Guk had been a “Minsaengdan”
member was totally unfounded.
I stated on several occasions that he had been neither a
factionalist nor a “Minsaengdan” member.
However, while I was in Luozigou for negotiation with Wu Yicheng, Ri Yong Guk was executed on a false charge of being a
“counterrevolutionary.” His records contained no evidence to
prove him to be a “Minsaengdan” member. He had once taken
refuge in the Maritime Province of Siberia from the wholesale
arrest and he could have lived there in peace as an exile for the rest
of his life. Nevertheless, he had returned to Jiandao and plunged
into the tempest in order to serve the cause of the revolution.
I still do not understand why it was necessary to label such a
faithful and honest man a “Minsaengdan” member.
Not long after the establishment of the people’s revolutionary
government in the district No. 5, Tong Chang-rong came to me
and said, with a pleasant smile on his face, “Comrade Kim Il Sung,
we are going to discuss the matter of a change in the political line
before long, with the participation of a man sent from the
100
Comintern. I hope that you, Comrade Kim Il Sung, will make the
keynote speech, since you have the experience of having
established the people’s revolutionary government in the district
No. 5.”
In the summer of that year, an important meeting was held to
discuss the change in the political line. The meeting was attended
by a man who had been sent to east Manchuria from the
Comintern, who brought with him a document concerning the
change in the line.
At the meeting I proposed the line of a people’s revolutionary
government as a united-front government based on a workerpeasant alliance, and explained once again the draft of the
government’s policy, which included land reform and other
democratic measures to be implemented by the government in the
fields of the economy, education, culture, public health and
military affairs. Our policy was in agreement with the new line
formulated by the Comintern. The man from the Comintern
expressed his full support for and approval of the line on the
establishment of the people’s revolutionary government.
The meeting, which lasted many days in an atmosphere of
serious debate and ideological struggle, adopted a decision to
reorganize the Soviet in accordance with our line of the people’s
revolutionary government and to combat the evil consequences of
the Leftist Soviet line in all the guerrilla zones.
After the meeting, all the Soviets in east Manchuria were
reshaped into people’s revolutionary governments. In places where
101
the conditions were not ripe, measures were adopted to form
peasant committees and gradually reorganize them into a people’s
revolutionary government. Property that had been expropriated in
the name of the abolition of private property and consumed by the
people in the guerrilla zones was compensated for by the new
government in cash and in kind.
The people’s revolutionary government, which was run by the
people, its masters, implemented democracy for the popular
masses, the overwhelming majority of the population, and
exercised dictatorship over the enemy.
The establishment of the people’s revolutionary government in
Gayahe and the meeting that had adopted the changed line led to
the emergence of a people’s revolutionary government in every
district of the revolutionary organization in east Manchuria, and
also in every village. Each district people’s revolutionary
government had its own chairman and vice-chairman, and nine to
eleven executive committee members. It also had departments of
the land, military affairs, economics, food, communications, and
medical services.
This was the embryo and prototype of the people’s government
to be established in the liberated homeland.
The people’s revolutionary government distributed land to the
peasants without compensation and enforced an eight-hour
working day in all the guerrilla zones. In those days there were
approximately a thousand workers in the Xiaowangqing guerrilla
base. Most of them were lumbermen, raftsmen and charcoal
102
burners. Five hundred of them worked at Sancidao, the
administrative centre of the district No. 2, and the other five
hundred at the foot of the Fangcao Mountains near Macun. They
all benefited from the eight-hour working day.
The people’s revolutionary government took stringent measures
to ensure that private entrepreneurs doubled the workers’ pay.
The government also placed the forests in and around the
guerrilla zones under its control and prohibited the felling of trees
without its permission.
In these circumstances, the Japanese manager of the Qinhe
lumber station at Daduchuan and Chinese lumber dealers came to
the guerrilla-zone authorities to negotiate permission for timberfelling. The matter was settled so that the purchasers paid one yuan
for a piece of lumber, but payment was made in kind, in items such
as clothing, food and other consumer items.
The people’s revolutionary government established the
Children’s Corps schools and gave the children free education, and
it ensured that all the population received free medical care at the
hospitals at Lishugou and Shiliping in the guerrilla zone. A law on
women’s equality was enforced and women participated in public
life and work, on a basis of equal rights with men.
Printing works, tailors’ shops and weapons repair works were
operated in the guerrilla zone.
Cultural activities in the guerrilla zones produced many famous
songs of lasting significance for our people, and theatrical art
flourished, producing many original works, which later developed
103
into such masterpieces as The Sea of Blood, The Fate of a SelfDefence Corps Man, and so on.
The term “Soviet,” symbolic of inhumanity and expropriation,
remained only a memento of the past. The people who had fled to
the enemy-held area from the evils of the Soviet policy began to
return to the guerrilla zones one by one or in groups. Old people
freely visited their neighbours, carrying their pipes at their waists.
The guerrilla zone rang once again with the laughter of a large and
harmonious community of people who trusted, loved and relied on
one another.
The valleys and mountains of Wangqing, which had withstood
the severe winter, began to be adorned with various kinds of
rustling flowers: the throbbing of a new life was in evidence.
This life roused such envy that the son of a landowner, who had
been held hostage at Xiaowangqing by Commander Chai’s unit,
begged to be allowed to live in the guerrilla zone.
104
4. The Man from the Comintern
In April 1933, when our struggle against the Leftist deviation
was at its height in the guerrilla base, Tong Chang-rong came to
see me in the company of a middle-aged man dressed in
dabushanzi. The man appeared like a gentleman and had a
gentleman’s manners. Seeing me from a distance, he smiled and
raised his hand above his head in a gesture of greeting. His eyes
were shining in such delight, I might have taken him for an old
acquaintance of mine.
On shaking hands with him, however, I found him to be a
stranger. But strange to say, I still had the feeling that this stranger
was an old acquaintance. So I received him kindly, with a smile.
This mysterious guest was Manchurian provincial party
committee member Pan, an inspector from the Comintern. Just as
Wei Zheng-min used to be addressed as Old Wei, this man was
addressed as Old Pan. Pan is the Chinese pronunciation of his
surname. According to Chinese custom, an elderly or respected
person was given the title “Old,” which was used as a polite way
of addressing him. Few people called him by his real name Ri Ki
Dong or by his nickname Pan Qing-you.
105
Inspector Pan was renowned as a revolutionary and party
worker among the communists in Manchuria.
I first heard of Pan from Wang Run-cheng. When Pan worked
as secretary of the Ningan county party committee after the
September 18 incident, Wang Run-cheng was a member of the
committee for propaganda under him. Wang said that he was put
in charge of propaganda on that committee on Pan’s
recommendation, and he was very proud of the fact. According to
him, Pan was a veteran who graduated from the Huangpu Military
Academy, participated in the uprising at Wuchang and the
northern expedition in China, and studied in the Soviet Union. He
had also been the secretary of the Suining central county party
committee. Wang said that he had been charmed more than once
by Pan’s noble qualities and keen understanding.
Wang’s respect for him was quite exceptional.
Hearing about him from Wang, I was delighted at the fact that
able revolutionaries like Pan were working in our local areas.
I later heard more about Pan from Choe Song Suk and Jo Tong
Uk, who came from north Manchuria. Choe Song Suk said that she
had been advised by him to come to Wangqing, and she described
in an interesting manner how she had participated under his
guidance in the May Day demonstration in the streets of Ningan.
These previous contacts led us to spend much time on
recollections of our common acquaintances Wang Run-cheng and
Choe Song Suk.
“Is Comrade Choe Song Suk from Ningan well?” Pan asked at
106
the beginning of our conversation.
His inquiry made it clear to me what Choe Song Suk had meant
when she said that Pan’s consideration for his subordinates was his
particularly good point, and I was deeply moved.
“Yes. On her arrival from north Manchuria she was elected to
the Dawangqing Soviet. She has now been elected to the women’s
department of the Xiaowangqing district committee, and is
actively involved in the work of the Women’s Association.”
“Does she go about on horseback over here, too?”
“So I have heard, but I have never seen her riding a horse.”
“She learnt to ride, and resolved to join the cavalry of the
revolutionary army. She is a bold and determined girl.”
“Then we Wangqing people are very fortunate! Don’t you
regret having sent her to us?”
“Why should I regret it? Her family is in north Manchuria, but I
told her to come to east Manchuria. To be candid, Jiandao is the
centre of the revolutionary struggle in Manchuria, so I told her that
if she wished to do her bit for the revolution, she should go to
Wangqing, to where the base is, to the people’s land; that I
expected a great deal from Jiandao, and that I, too, wished to come
and work here.”
Though I was grateful to Pan for acknowledging east
Manchuria as the centre of the Korean revolution, I felt somewhat
ashamed to hear it. I wondered what impression he would be given
by the Leftist abuses in the guerrilla zone when he witnessed them.
Of course, I had previously known almost nothing of his political
107
ideas and attitude. Though he was a man of broad political
perspective and rich experience in the struggle, he could not
always be expected to oppose the Leftist trend unreservedly.
However, I set great store by Wang and Choe’s opinion of Pan.
They often emphasized that Pan, being an experienced man, had
never suffered from prejudice against his subordinates and dealt
with every matter on the basis of his own conviction, with fairness
and prudence. Moreover, Pan produced a good impression on me
when I first met him.
That day’s conversation allowed me to get to know him. We
parted with a promise to have more serious talks later.
The visitor from the Comintern had timed his visit badly for
me, for I had to go to command my unit in the fight to repulse
thousands of “punitive” troops who were attacking us in waves.
“Then I must go with you to fight,” he said. “Please give me an
old rifle at least.”
Pan insisted on taking the field with us for at least one day,
saying that as an envoy of the Comintern, if he returned without so
much as seeing how we were fighting in east Manchuria, he would
feel ashamed of himself and would regret it all his life.
“Comrade Pan, bullets do not make exceptions for inspectors
from the Comintern. There will be many chances to see battle, so
please rest from the fatigue of your journey today.”
After I had dissuaded him, I went to the battlefield.
The enemy had surrounded the Xiaowangqing guerrilla zone on
three sides, and had been attacking us persistently for three days.
108
In stubborn defensive tactics, we mowed him down. The enemy
suffered hundreds of casualties before he retreated. The “punitive”
forces, which had invaded the guerrilla zone in the direction of
Guanmenlazi and Mt. Ppyojok under cover of spring fog, began
fighting among themselves, in the style of a tragi-comedy, which
was much talked about among the inhabitants of Xiaowangqing.
Pan, too, burst into laughter at the news.
His appearance in Wangqing provoked different reactions
among the inhabitants.
Those who, regarding the Leftist Soviet line as the Comintern’s
policy, had placed themselves at its beck and call, thought that Old
Pan would support their position, and that his appearance would,
therefore, be a good opportunity to apply sanctions against the
proponents of the line of the people’s revolutionary government
and brand them as Rightists, so that they would no longer dispute
the form of government.
On the other hand, those who, denouncing the Soviet line as
Leftist, had worked all along for the establishment of a new form
of government in accordance with the line of the people’s
revolutionary government, watched Old Pan’s every action
closely, apprehensive that their anti-Soviet position might be
rejected by him or that, in the worst case, they might even be
punished in the name of the Comintern. Many of them foretold
that Pan’s visit would complicate the situation in the guerrilla
zone, which had just begun to shake off the grip of the Soviet line.
The former group was in triumphant mood; the latter was in a
109
state of mental defeat. Both attitudes sprang from the fact that they
regarded the Comintern’s authority as absolute. The Comintern,
which was capable of disbanding a party or trying a man for his
crimes, seemed as awesome to them as an international supreme
court. They thought that the Comintern could redeem or destroy
the fate of a revolutionary as it pleased.
Pan’s appearance placed a strain on the guerrilla zone. I, too,
could sense the strain in the atmosphere at every moment.
The attitude which Pan would take towards those of us who had
supported the line of the people’s revolutionary government
against the Soviet line of the Comintern and denounced the Soviet
measures as Leftist abuses was a matter of serious concern for us.
I thought it fortunate for our revolution that the Comintern had
sent its representative to east Manchuria, where the people were
groaning under the yoke of Leftist high-handedness. At a time
when the advocates of the Soviet line and the line of the people’s
revolutionary government were arguing with each other over who
was correct, Pan’s appearance would initiate a decisive phase by
his supporting or rejection of the different lines.
Nobody had yet given any assurance that the Comintern would
support our position. But I was determined to lodge a protest to Pan
against the directives that had been issued in turn by the Comintern,
the Manchurian provincial party committee and other organizations,
directives which did not suit the actual conditions in the guerrilla
bases. I was also ready, if necessary, to argue with him about
theoretical questions, in order to rectify the ultra-Leftist tendency in
110
the implementation of the Soviet line and the anti-“Minsaengdan”
struggle. I was not in the least afraid of punishment or sanctions. In
short, I believed that the decisive moment had arrived.
During those days certain disgruntled comrades apparently sent
a letter of complaint to the Comintern, requesting it to settle the
dispute in east Manchuria. Having examined the letter, it had
apparently sent Pan, a Korean, to settle the dispute, because the
majority of the inhabitants in east Manchuria were Koreans.
Inspector Pan himself later said that such a letter had been received
by the Comintern.
When I came back from the battle in defence of Xiaowangqing,
Pan came to see me again. His expression was not so radiant as it
had been when I first met him. From the inspector’s expression,
which betrayed heavy anxiety behind his vague smile, I judged
that he had finally found himself faced with a choice between the
grim realities on which political philosophies had become
entangled. It seemed that he had clashed with Tong Chang-rong
over the issue of the political line.
I saw to it that Pan stayed at old man Ri Chi Baek’s house, the
largest one in Macun, and spent some ten days talking with him in
the front room of the house.
Pan spoke Chinese fluently, and he spoke in Chinese from the
start, so I was obliged to do the same. We talked mainly at night
and early in the mornings. During daylight hours I had no time to
spare to talk with him because I was commanding my unit. Pan
travelled around the guerrilla zone during the day, busily
111
acquainting himself with the actual conditions there.
People who have frequently stayed away from their homes will
understand very well how intimate travelling companions who
share the same lodging can become, despite the inconvenience,
and how charming and interesting stories become woven through
their intimate relations. Pan and I, too, became intimate during
those ten days, so intimate that we became like members of one
family.
Although Inspector Pan was my elder by more than twenty
years, as well as being a veteran revolutionary with a rich
experience of struggle, he never put on airs or betrayed any
awareness of his seniority. He talked to me frankly and
enthusiastically, placing himself on comradely terms with me.
First we introduced ourselves, tracing our pasts, but avoiding
formal matters relating to revolutionary practice. I did this first,
and then Pan followed suit. And then we took turns in filling up
the blanks in our past experiences or relating our impressions of
the events we had experienced, not noticing that the night was
passing.
Pan became very curious about me when he learned that I had
been in prison four times before I was even twenty years old.
“So you are my senior, Comrade Kim, in terms of
imprisonment, aren’t you?”
He said that he, too, had some experience of prison life in
Harbin, and that as a result of a large May Day demonstration he
had organized, the party organization in Ningan County had
112
suffered wholesale destruction. The organization was crushed by
the merciless repression of the Manchukuo authorities and the
“punitive” actions of the Japanese army, and the party members
and hardcore elements were scattered far and wide, he said. Pan
attributed the losses to the mental vertigo that had afflicted him
with the rapid growth of the party ranks and of their energetic
activities. But he recognized that the lessons of the May Day
demonstration had provided the political motive for the foundation
of the Ningan guerrilla forces under the command of Kim Hae San
and Ri Kwang Rim.
“People realized after a few lashings in prison that we had
organized the demonstration clumsily and belatedly. By organizing
it in the streets of the county town we actually exposed party
members to enemy repression at a time when we should have sent
the organization deeper underground and prepared it for an armed
struggle!”
Whenever he mentioned the demonstration he was angry with
himself. But he admired the demonstration we had organized
against the Jilin-Hoeryong railway construction project. He was
the type of man who is fair and generous in assessing other
people’s achievements while underestimating or even denigrating
his own success.
“You say you celebrated your twenty-first birthday a few days
ago, so you are only half as old as I am, but I must say, Comrade
Kim, that you are my senior not only in terms of imprisonment,
but also in terms of life experience,” Inspector Pan said when he
113
had heard my personal history.
I could not help feeling awkward as he repeated that I was his
senior.
“Comrade Pan, if you praise me to the skies, I am afraid you
will make a fool of me.”
He shrugged his shoulders in the way Russians do.
“I should like you to know that it is discontent with my own life
which underlies my admiration of you. I am a man who has not led
a satisfactory life. At my age of forty-three I can say that the prime
of my life is past, but I have done nothing which I can be proud of.
That is my sorrow.”
“Don’t be too modest. You have experienced the scorching sun
in the south and the snowstorms in the north; your life has known
laughter, anguish and tears. To be frank, I am not fond of people
who look down upon themselves. How can you say that the prime
of your life is past at only a little more than forty?”
He was not displeased by my criticism. I thought he was too
modest with himself. The meritorious service he had rendered
as secretary of the Ningan county party committee and the
Suining central county party committee, and the role of a
midwife he had played in the birth of the Ningan guerrilla
forces, not to mention his activity in southern China–all these
could never be ignored. The Suining central county party
committee was a very large organization that had been formed
by the merger of the Muling, Ningan, Dongning, Mishan and
other county party committees. Once rumour had it that Pan
114
was to receive honourable promotion to the post of a senior
cadre in the eastern area bureau of Jilin Province, which was to
play the role of an intermediary liaison echelon between the
Comintern and the Manchurian provincial party committee. I
was not sure whether he actually had been promoted or not, but
the mere fact the Comintern had appointed him as the inspector
in charge of the work in east Manchuria was eloquent proof
that he was a man of high reputation.
Our conversation proceeded with an exchange of information
and opinions concerning the current political questions of mutual
interest.
The first subject of our discussion was the Comintern and the
international communist movement. This discussion was
extremely valuable to me, for although I was in touch with the
workers of the Comintern’s liaison office, I had never had candid
and serious talks with them.
I explained to him the efforts made by the Korean communists
to implement the decisions of the Comintern, and then clarified our
position and attitude towards its line and directives.
“We consider that the Comintern fulfils the role of the General
Staff of the international communist movement excellently. Over
the past years it has achieved a great deal by rallying the
communists throughout the world into an international alliance and
struggling against imperialism, for peace and socialism. In the
clear understanding that the Comintern is the international centre
which performs the function of centralized control of the
115
communist movement, we will, in the future as in the past, remain
loyal to its rules and its line. But, Comrade Pan, I would like to
take the liberty of telling you something else about the activity of
the Comintern.”
The final part of my statement immediately made him tense.
“How should I take what you have said? You don’t happen to
hold any opinion opposed to it, do you?”
“Perhaps an opinion, or a complaint. I have wanted to tell to the
Comintern a few things for a long time.”
“Speak up, whatever you have on your mind.” He gazed at me
with curiosity.
I believed the time had come when I should speak out to the
Comintern.
“I do not support any faction, but I very much regret the
Comintern’s decision in the past to disband the Korean Communist
Party. Factions existed not only in the Korean Communist Party;
the forging of signatures by means of potato stamps was also
practised by the Indochinese Communist Party and other parties,
wasn’t it?”
A look of surprise, rather than tension, flitted across his face.
My words had taken the inspector by surprise, a man who had
been through all manner of bitter experiences.
“As a Korean communist like yourself, Comrade Kim, not as an
inspector from the Comintern, I regarded the disbandment of the
Korean Communist Party as a disgrace, and share you in your
regret that the Comintern had declared its disbandment. But there
116
is one thing you must understand in this matter, and that is, why
the Indochinese Communist Party remains in existence, while the
Korean Communist Party was disbanded. It is because a prominent
figure like Ho Chi Minh represented Indochina in the Comintern.
By contrast, in those years the ranks of the Korean communist
movement contained no such outstanding figure or centre of
leadership who would be recognized by the Comintern.”
His view that one of the major reasons for the party’s collapse
was the absence of a leader or a centre of leadership shocked me,
for I had considered factional strife within the party to be the
primary cause of its disbandment. It took Pan’s cogent analysis to
discern that the disbandment of the Korean Communist Party was
due to the absence of a leader, a man of world renown
acknowledged by the Comintern, who could resist his party’s
disbandment.
In addition to the matter of the Comintern, we also had a
valuable discussion concerning the practical questions arising in
the Korean revolution.
Inspector Pan said that the Korean communists must work hard
to found a new party of their own, instead of living in a state of
frustration, and sharing lodgings with the party of another country
because most of their party members were in exile after the party
had ceased to exist.
“I am not saying this because I am a Korean revolutionary, but I
do believe that the Koreans must have their own communist party.
If the Korean communists regarded the disbandment of the Korean
117
Communist Party as depriving them for good of the chance to
rebuild their party, that would amount to suicide. It is the
legitimate and inviolable right of the Koreans to have their own
party. One may share another man’s room for a couple of years,
but not for ever.”
Pan’s conviction that the Korean communists must rebuild their
party completely was in agreement with our policy of founding a
party, which had been adopted at the Kalun meeting.
“You are right,” I said, encouraged by his words. “If a Korean
does not strive to rebuild the party, he should be regarded as
having abandoned the Korean revolution. We must not be like a
man who shares another man’s room, studying his expression, and
wasting time. On the basis of this point of view, we put forward a
new policy of forming grassroots party organizations first, and
then establishing the party from bottom to top by expanding and
strengthening them, and we established a party organization, the
Society for Rallying Comrades, three years ago in line with this
policy.”
I went into the details of the historical background to the
formation of the first party organization, as well as describing my
own involvement in this work and its expansion.
Pan listened to me with close attention.
“Comrade Kim, I may be a man of fancy, but you are a man of
thorough practice. It is simply marvellous. But, look here. It’s a
problem that there are too many factions in the Korean communist
movement. So you must not recognize the factionalists, but make a
118
fresh start among young people. You can do nothing with
factionalists around you. Many of them have become dogs of the
Japanese. And many of the confirmed factionalists who are not
Japanese dogs are involved in a tug-of-war struggle for hegemony,
instead of working for the revolution. In order to combat factions,
we must fight the Japanese successfully. If our ranks grow
stronger, and the hardcore elements are united in the course of the
struggle, they will lay the foundation for the establishment of the
party.”
His words excited me greatly. They were, of course, not new to
me. The basic policy we had maintained was that the party should
be formed with young people who had not been infected with
factionalism.
I renewed my resolve to found the party by uniting the Korean
people and building up its core, so as to accomplish the basic task
of national liberation.
It was fortunate that Pan and I had the opportunity to discuss
questions concerning the international communist movement, the
Comintern, and the founding of the party in Korea, and reach
complete agreement.
Our conversation naturally turned to the issue of Soviet power,
which had been occupying everybody’s attention in Jiandao. I was
honestly eager to hear Pan’s opinion of the Soviet government to
which the people had turned their backs, at which they had spat,
and from which they stood aloof.
“Old Pan,” I said casually, “what is your impression of the
119
guerrilla zone you have looked around on your first visit to
Jiandao?”
“I would like to pay my respects to the people of Jiandao and
the revolutionaries who have built a wonderful society on this
barren land,” Pan said in a loud voice, unbuttoning and opening
the front skirts of his gown. “The people here have done a lot of
work and endured tremendous hardships. But I must say that it is a
matter of great regret that an unwelcome spectre is hovering over
this marvellous land.”
From his emotional tone, I could tell that he was greatly
excited.
“A spectre? What do you mean by that?” I asked.
He picked up a large pinch of cut tobacco from the pouch which
old man Ri Chi Baek offered and began to roll a thick cigarette.
“I mean the Leftist Soviet line. It is pulling down the tower
which has been built by the strenuous efforts of the people of
Jiandao. I can’t understand this at all. How is it possible for the
revolutionaries of Jiandao, who pioneered the Manchurian
revolution, to take leave of their senses to such an extent?”
“To tell you the truth, I find the Leftist deviation so upsetting
that my hair may turn white.”
“How can they be so blind and stupid?... I talked with them, and
they were totally ignorant of the Soviet government in Russia.
Comrade Tong Chang-rong is a man of rich fighting experience
and gentle character....
“What a preposterous mistake! It is clearly no accident that
120
letters of complaint were addressed to the Comintern. You have
had plenty to worry about, I expect.”
He glanced at me in commiseration.
“I wouldn’t mind personal distress, no matter how great. My
heart ached at the sight of people who were suffering under Leftist
high-handedness.”
Pan puffed at his cigarette nervously and continually, as if to
give vent to his anger.
“I have encountered a stroke of good luck in the midst of
misfortune, which is that the line of the people’s revolutionary
government was born of the soil overgrown with Leftist weeds, the
government which enjoys the people’s support and will save our
revolution from the crisis. Comrade Kim, a short while ago I
informed Comrade Tong Chang-rong that your proposal is
marvellous.”
“Do you mean to say that you also support the line of the
people’s revolutionary government?”
“If not, why should I have said so to Comrade Tong Changrong? He has also expressed his support for the line. He seems to
have been strongly impressed by your statement that anything the
people like is good. Let us now work better, with firm confidence
in ourselves.”
Pan grasped my hand in an unconscious but significant gesture,
and then released it.
In this way the Comintern’s support for our line on the people’s
revolutionary government was confirmed.
121
Pan said it was a remarkable success for us to have gained the
freedom of activity of the guerrilla army by forming a special
detachment and improved relations with the national salvation
army of the Chinese nationalists. He encouraged us revolutionaries
in east Manchuria to follow up this success.
Saying that our line on the people’s revolutionary government
was basically in accord with the line of the revolutionary masses’
government proposed by the Chinese party, he explained the
Chinese line briefly.
The Chinese line proposed a new and clear strategy on the
Manchurian issue, centring on the switchover of their political line.
It had been formally issued in the name of the Central Committee
of the Chinese Communist Party, but was in fact drafted by the
Comintern. It could be said, therefore, to represent the will of the
Comintern.
Their idea of forming peasant committees as organs of rural
government attracted our attention. The proposal was that the
peasant committee should manage relations between the
peasants and the guerrilla army, supplying food to the army and
organizing armed self-defence guards on a routine basis, and
that the party should ensure that hired farm hands and poor
peasants become the leading force in the peasant committee,
and thus rally the masses of middle peasants around them.
In other words, the Comintern had recognized the irrationality
of the Leftist Soviet line in the question of political power, and had
acknowledged the need to replace it with a new form of
122
government. After all, this was the confirmation of the correctness
of the line of the people’s revolutionary government which we had
proposed.
However, Inspector Pan was very concerned about the name of
the peasant committee. Although peasant committees were better
suited than Soviets to the situation in Manchuria, he said, a policy
which was orientated towards the hired farm hands and poor
peasants would not be able to rally the broader masses behind
them. He stressed that the people’s revolutionary government was
an improvement and advance, a type of united front which was
capable of rallying all sections of the population–workers,
peasants, students, intellectuals and others–who were opposed to
the Japanese. He said he would express this opinion in a letter to
the Comintern and the Manchurian provincial party committee.
“What does it matter whether we call it a peasant committee or
a people’s revolutionary government? All that is required is to
satisfy the people’s desires. A people’s revolutionary government
will do in a place where we can put up such a sign, and a peasant
committee will do where a committee is more suitable, won’t it?”
In this way, I tried to calm the inspector’s anxieties, but he was
still not at ease.
“You are right in general, but the name of the government must
cater to the people’s preferences. In any case, I must bring the
matter to the Comintern.”
I am not sure whether he did express his decision in a letter to
the Comintern or not.
123
In the wake of these events, the Soviets in all the guerrilla zones
in east Manchuria were replaced by people’s revolutionary
governments or peasant committees, the Worker-Peasant Guerrilla
Army was renamed the Anti-Japanese People’s Guerrilla Army,
and the Red Guards were reorganized as the Anti-Japanese SelfDefence Corps.
The inspector’s visit raised a whirlwind that swept away the
outmoded political order of the guerrilla zone. The Jucheorientated revolutionary policy which we had maintained since our
days in Jilin won international support and encouragement, and the
correctness of all our lines and policies was confirmed yet again.
This does not mean, however, that we agreed with everything
that the Comintern did or that we obeyed its orders blindly. While
respecting the measures taken by the Comintern, I applied my own
independent judgement to them, regarding them from the point of
view of the interests of the Korean revolution and the world
revolution.
The most doubtful aspect of the Comintern’s strategy and the
steps it had taken were its views on, and its manner of dealing
with, the Korean revolution as a link in the overall chain of the
world revolution.
When the October Socialist Revolution triumphed in Russia,
and the ideal of socialism became a reality, the communists of all
countries were faced with the noble task of both preserving the
gains of the revolution and following up its success on a world
scale.
124
In response to the requirements of the times, Lenin established
the Third Communist International in 1919. Its historic mission
was to organize the struggle of the working class and the
oppressed nations of the whole world to free themselves from
imperialist oppression and the chains of capital, and to develop this
struggle on an international scale. This was a militant mission that
differed from those of its predecessors, the First and Second
Internationals, and fitted with the requirements of new times.
One of the major tasks of the Comintern at the time was to
safeguard and defend the Soviet Union. The defence of the
positions of victorious socialism was inseparable from the
expansion of the socialist cause. Without defending them, it was
impossible to spread and further develop the success of the
October Revolution on a global scale. It was quite natural that the
defence of the Soviet Union became an international slogan for all
communists, and that the implementation of this slogan became
the major content of the international communist movement.
These relations, which were historically inevitable and
essential, supplied grist to the mills of those who opposed
communism and lent plausibility to the reactionary bourgeois
theoreticians who denounced the communist parties of various
countries which implemented the orders of the Comintern as
“stooges of the Soviet Union” or traitors to their own nations.
The communists in every country should have learned a lesson
from this and combined their national and international duties in
an appropriate manner. The Comintern should also have regarded
125
this matter as highly important. If it was to fulfil its mission
satisfactorily, the Comintern, while emphasizing the defence of the
positions of victorious socialism, should have given sincere
support to the communist movements in other countries, and
should, in particular, have championed the interests of the lesser
nations suffering under imperialist oppression and assisted their
revolutionary struggles.
The Comintern, however, paid little attention to this need. Some
officials of the Comintern talked loudly about the revolutionary
movements in large countries, but dealt in a slighting or arbitrary
fashion with matters relating to the revolutions in small countries.
They discriminated too much in their views and their attitudes
towards the revolution in different countries, in proportion to the
share they could contribute to the building of an international
bulwark for the defence of the Soviet Union.
Certain individuals and theoreticians occupying important posts
in the Comintern spread the view that victories for the
revolutionary movements in large countries would automatically
lead to victories for the revolutionary struggles or independence
movements in the adjacent small countries. Figuratively speaking,
they held the view that if the head ripens, the ears will also ripen of
their own accord.
This view gave rise to a sycophantic tendency among
communists of small countries, who abandoned the independent
position that one’s own effort and the efforts of one’s own people
were the motive force of revolution, and began to rely on large
126
countries. It also produced a chauvinistic tendency among the
communists of the large countries, who ignored the communists of
small countries and restrained their independent activities.
Thus it was not fortuitous that the revolutionaries’ confidence
in, and unsullied devotion to, the Comintern and the international
communist movement became stained, despite the fact that these
communists from different countries had been tremendously
inspired by the great events of the birth of the socialist state and
the foundation of the Comintern, and looked up to them as an ideal
and a beacon-light as they advanced through the flames of
struggle.
After the victory of the October Socialist Revolution and the
foundation of the Comintern, loving support and a yearning for
communism surged across the face of the world in an inexorable
wave.
Renowned persons in all parts of the world were quick to join
the ranks of those who espoused communism. Many of the major
figures of the time, regarding communism as the only idea that
represented the future of mankind, made efforts, through different
channels, and regardless of their political affiliations and religious
beliefs, to establish contact with the newborn Soviet Republic or
the Comintern and receive aid from them.
Many of the nationalists in Korea also espoused, supported or
sympathized with the idea of communism. Authoritative
Christians, Chondoists and other religious believers were among
them. For instance, Hyon Sun, the third minister of the Seoul
127
Jongdong Methodist Church, represented the Korean religious
organization of “Faith in Jesus” at the Far Eastern People’s
Congress held in Moscow in January 1922.
Hyon Sun was a minister of high reputation in Korea and he
was elected one of the members of the Korean Provisional
Government when it was formed in Shanghai. According to
material which our comrades obtained from the Comintern’s
archives in the Soviet Union a few years ago, when he attended the
conference he carried with him a letter of attorney signed by Kim
Pyong Jo, one of the group who drafted the Independence
Declaration of March 1, 1919, and by Jo Sang Sop, Son Jong Do,
Kim In Jon, Song Pyong Jo and other ministers. When Hyon Sun
filled in the form issued by the Koryo Department of the Russian
Communist Party, he stated that he was connected with the
Shanghai Communist Party, and that he had spent three weeks in
Russia in September 1919. In answer to a questionaire, on his
“Aims and hopes,” he wrote, “I aim for the independence of Korea
and hope for the realization of communism.” This document was
only recently obtained by our comrades.
Of course, I am not sure how deep an understanding he
possessed of the new idea of communism, or how warmly he
sympathized with it, but it seems that he expected a great deal
from the Comintern.
Ri Tong Hwi, the first Prime Minister of the Korean Provisional
Government in Shanghai, was involved in the communist
movement. It is well known that he was sent as a representative to
128
Moscow to report to the Comintern on the results of a joint
conference of the Koryo Communist Party.
The reformist force of Chondoism also sought alignment with
the Comintern.
Choe Tong Hui, a son of Choe Si Hyong, the second leader of
the Chondoist religion, and a grandnephew of Choe Je U, the
founder of Chondoism, represented the reforming wing of
Chondoism. In his capacity as chairman of the foreign affairs
committee of the Emergency Supreme Revolutionary Council of
Chondoists, he spent some time in Vladivostok in Russia, working
hard for negotiations with the Comintern. He wrote letters to
Katayama Sen, Injelson, and other officials who were working at
the Oriental Department of the Comintern, requesting them to give
the support needed by the movement for Korea’s independence,
and declaring that active cooperation between the Chondoists, the
servants of the poor people, and the Comintern, the vanguard of
the working class, would guarantee the success of the revolution in
the Orient.
Choe Tong Hui even sent a letter to Chicherin, at that time
People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Republic,
requesting him to send within two years the weapons, explosives,
ammunition, cavalry equipment, and means of transport required
to equip fifteen composite brigades of the Koryo National
Revolutionary Army which it was planned to organize. The fact
that the reformist forces of Chondoism sought a new route for the
independence movement, despite the hatred and denunciation of
129
conservative Chondoists, was worthy of national admiration. But
neither Soviet Russia nor the Comintern complied with their
request.
Ryo Un Hyong, alias Mong Yang, also visited Moscow in 1919
and spoke with Lenin on the question of Korea’s independence.
People would not believe it if they heard that an anti-communist
element such as Syngman Rhee once supported Soviet Russia. But
it seems to be true. There is information that he once visited
Moscow and requested a colossal amount of financial aid, and that
when his request was ignored, he turned against Soviet Russia and
the Comintern and became ultrapro-American.
Korea, the territory of which was only a hundredth of the
Soviet Union, a land of thatched mud huts huddled together and
skinny, hobbling donkeys, obviously appeared too small and
too miserable to attract the attention of the Comintern officials.
Even in the years when we were waging an armed struggle
against the Japanese in Manchuria, their views on Korea did
not change greatly. I greatly regretted the fact that the
Comintern was so indifferent to the fate of the peoples of small
countries and the national liberation struggles of the
communists of small countries. Needless to say, this unkind
treatment and cold attitude merely poured oil on the flames of
our determination to establish the principle of Juche in the
revolution and liberate our nation by our own efforts.
I was annoyed most of all by the fact that we lacked the strength
to oppose or correct the attitudes and activities of the Comintern
130
with which we disagreed, and were unable to control the way in
which the Comintern’s work was organized and its chronic malady
of red-tapism, although we knew this might lead to the sacrifice of
the Korean revolution or place a stumbling block in the path of its
Juche-oriented development.
We, the communists of the new generation, longed for the
Comintern to understand the problems of the Korean communists
and march in step with our aspirations and our unshakable resolve
to carry out the revolution in our own way.
Pan’s appearance in east Manchuria at a time when we were
struggling with complex problems requiring prompt solutions was
welcome. My acquaintance with him was one of the most
significant events in my life. It was a good thing that there were
people in the Comintern who understood us and supported us. His
statements that the ranks of the Korean communist movement
should be renewed with trained hardcore elements who had not
been infected with factionalism, and that a party of the Korean
people should be established produced an especially strong
impression on me. His advice encouraged me and strengthened my
sense of independence in thinking and in practice. Had it not been
for his influence and comradely encouragement, it would have
been impossible for me to fight effectively, even though I risked
my life, in defence of the Juche spirit of the Korean nation and our
revolution at a time when the struggle against the “Minsaengdan”
was being conducted in such a dreadful manner.
Pak So Sim introduced me to Marx’s Capital, Shang Yue taught
131
me the Dream at the Red Mansion, and now Inspector Pan had
given me sincere support, encouragement and sympathy and so
strengthened my conviction that Koreans must not forget Korea.
In all history of my revolutionary struggle against the Japanese
imperialists I never discussed the fate of the Korean revolution and
the political line of this revolution so enthusiastically, sincerely
and so seriously as I did with Inspector Pan. He was a rare
theoretician, with an unshakable commitment to the revolution.
Had he been alive to work with us when we advanced to the area
of Mt. Paektu in command of large forces in the latter half of the
1930s, he could have made many theoretical and practical
contributions to the solution of the difficult problems facing the
Korean revolution.
My acquaintance with Pan opened my eyes to the vital need for
a theoretician capable of guiding and steering the practical
struggle, in addition to the man of practice who was also
important in the revolutionary struggle.
Following our unforgettable discussions at Xiaowangqing, Pan
became my most intimate friend and comrade. Although he was
more than twenty years older than me, we forged a relationship as
friends and comrades in a matter of ten days, and this friendship
and comradeship were as intimate as those of ten years duration.
But they were not cemented by any material or personal interests.
This exceptionally warm friendship was derived from a common,
long-cherished desire for the liberation and freedom of Korea and
from a shared way of thinking and aspiration to independence in
132
all matters.
The depth of a friendship cannot be measured by the length
of its duration or by the number of conversations. A long
period of association does not necessarily indicate a deep
friendship, nor does a short period of association mean
friendship is shallow. The essential thing is the viewpoint and
attitude one maintains in approaching man and his destiny, in
approaching one’s nation and its destiny. Depending on this
viewpoint and attitude, the warmth of friendship may be
redoubled or it may cool. Love for man, love for one’s fellow
people, and love for one’s country are the touchstone of
friendship.
When Inspector Pan was leaving Xiaowangqing, I saw him off
on horseback as far as the boundary between Wangqing and
Hunchun Counties. Because he limped a little, I had seen to it that
he could travel on horseback.
During our ride we talked a lot, and during a two days’ stopover
at the village of Shiliping, we discussed a host of subjects,
including the international communist movement, our relations
with the Chinese party, and matters relating to the Korean
revolution at the present and in the future. We also made firm
pledges to one another.
The subjects we discussed at the time would be good material
for the plot of a novel. Ri Pom Sok’s military academy was in that
village, the O Jung Hwa’s family were taking refuge there.
Pan even touched on his own family life. He said his wife was
133
only half his own age. I don’t remember exactly whether he called
her O Yong Ok or O Pung Ok.
I asked him why he had only married when he was over forty.
“Ha, ha!” he laughed, “no need to ask why. I did not have the
charm a husband needs, so girls stayed away from me. Who would
ever love a lame man like me? If it were not for Madam O, I might
have remained an old bachelor.”
He seemed to have been born with a low opinion of himself. I
sympathized with him deeply for his delay in marrying.
“I expect Madam O has a sharp eye for a man. I have heard that
she is a rare beauty. Late love must be as sweet as honey.”
“Of course, but strangely enough, it was she, not I, that
proposed. Anyway, late love is indeed exceptionally sweet.”
“Rumour has it that she is the envy of all in north Manchuria.”
“But, Comrade Kim, I hope you will not take so long as I did, if
only for the sake of male dignity.”
“Well, I, too, may be late. It does not depend on what I wish.”
We chatted and laughed, sitting in a grass field near the village
of Shiliping, and deepening our friendship.
Pan said that he had become deeply attached to Wangqing, and
regretted parting with me. His next destinations were Hunchun and
Helong.
“Comrade Kim, I will carry your image in my memory all my
life. I am very happy to have met you in Wangqing,
Comrade Kim Il Sung,” he said, with a serious look, his eyes
brimming with tears, his hand squeezing mine, as he crossed the
134
border.
“So am I. I am most fortunate to have met you, Comrade Pan.
Frankly, I don’t want to bid you farewell.”
“How could I wish to part? I wish that after this journey I could
come to east Manchuria with my wife and work hand in hand with
you, Comrade Kim. I am outdated in some ways. A little stained....
Please be Korea’s Ho Chi Minh.”
With these words, Inspector Pan took his leave of Wangqing.
When he was some distance away, he turned round and raised his
hand above his head. Looking at his hand as I had when I first met
him, I felt as if a long time had passed. The details of his
expression seemed to have been imprinted on my eyes to remain
there for decades.
Feelings of loneliness and sorrow at parting from a man with
whom I had forged a friendship in so short a time gripped my heart as
he looked back at me, and I wondered why the farewell was so sad.
Pan was smiling, but he, too, looked sad. His smile lay heavy on my
heart. If he had not smiled, my heart would have been much lighter.
He left me, wishing that he could return but died in Hunchun and we
never met again.
He was murdered by Pak Tu Nam, the political commissar of
the Hunchun guerrilla battalion. Pak Tu Nam was criticized most
severely by the inspector at an enlarged meeting of the Hunchun
county party committee which discussed the change in the
revolutionary line. Branded as a ringleader of factional strife, he
was dismissed from his post as political commissar. While the
135
inspector’s guards in the yard of the house were looking at some
Model 38 rifles that had been captured from the enemy, and the
inspector was busy writing something, the traitor picked up one of
the rifles and shot the inspector dead. The news shocked the
people in Wangqing.
When I heard the news, I locked myself up in the front room of
Ri Chi Baek’s house, where Pan and I had discussed the revolution
and the meaning of human life, and wept over his death all day
long.
136
5. The Memory of a White Horse
I was intending to leave out this anecdote, because I considered
a war-horse too insignificant to be given a space in the memoirs of
my eighty years of life, in which there were so many heroes, so
many benefactors and so many events that should be remembered.
But my affection for this horse seems to tint my memory of it
too strongly, and the impulse to make it known to the public is too
strong for me to keep it to myself. Moreover, the animal is
unforgettably linked with many people by the bonds of human
feelings. The stories of these people are also too valuable to be
consigned to oblivion.
In the spring of 1933 I came into possession of a horse.
One day an official of the people’s revolutionary government of
Shiliping came to see me with some guerrillas, and brought me a
white horse. In those days, the headquarters of the Wangqing
guerrilla battalion was located in the valley of Lishugou, Macun,
Xiaowangqing. The procession these people formed appeared too
ostentatious for a company leading a war-horse with them.
The visitors hitched the horse in the front yard of the
137
headquarters, and then announced their arrival.
“Commander Kim, we respectfully wish to present a horse to
you, who have to travel many rugged miles. Please accept this
gift,” said the official, speaking for his company.
I was embarrassed at the sudden appearance of the delegation
and at their solemnly decorous manner which seemed more
appropriate to some grand function. Moreover, I was immediately
surprised by the size of the group, larger than a squad of soldiers
nowadays.
“I am afraid I am not worthy of such rich consideration as to
allow me to ride about on a horse at the age of just twenty,” I said,
attempting to express my thanks modestly. The elderly official
gesticulated in surprise.
“Rich consideration? The Japanese battalion commanders ride
around pompously on horseback to show that they are fine
officers. Why should our guerrilla commanders be any worse than
them? I have read a book which says that Red-gowned General
Kwak Jae U commanded his cavalry on horseback. A military
commander needs dignity before everything else.”
“Where did this horse come from? It’s a draught horse from a
peasant’s family, isn’t it?”
The government official waved his arms in denial.
“No, it isn’t. It’s a pet horse. Do you remember the old man, a
former farm servant, who was elected to the government council at
Shiliping the other day?”
“Of course. I even spoke in his support.”
138
“This is a present to you from that old man.”
“I can hardly believe that he had such a wonderful horse,” I
remarked, looking closely at the horse with its saddle and stirrups
hanging on both sides, while I stroked its back. There was really
no doubt that it was a farm horse. I could not make myself believe
that any peasant in the mountain valley of Shiliping could possess
a sleek pet horse like this, still less the former servant of a
landowner.
The official insisted that it was a pet horse, probably because he
was afraid I might refuse to accept it if he admitted the truth.
I don’t remember the old man’s full name, but his surname was
Pak.
Old man Pak had a reason for making a present of the horse to
me. It is a moving story which should be told here.
The story begins at the time when he left the landowner’s house
after serving out his term. When the old man became too old to
work, his master released him. In return for his life-long service,
the landowner gave him a white foal which was a few months old.
Immediately after it was born, the unfortunate animal suffered
serious bruising, when it was stepped on by its mother, and it was
ailing in the stable, too sick to romp about outside. It was infirm
and undernourished.
The niggardly landowner pretended to show him favour by
giving him the sick animal, which might die the same day or the
next, which was already as good as dead.
Old man Pak came home to his hut with the sick foal in his
139
arms, shedding tears. The sight of this sick foal, given as a reward
for all the drudgery he had performed for decades made him feel
sad at the absurdity of his whole life and at the hardness of the
world.
Nonetheless, the old man, who led a solitary, lonely life,
treasured the animal as if it were a precious stone in his hands
and tended it with all the care he could muster. The foal grew
into a full-fledged horse. Whenever he felt lonely, he would go
to the horse, and grumbled to himself, giving vent to his
feelings at his sad plight, and grieving over his fate. The horse
was a loving son and daughter and friend to him.
Having been mistreated all his life, the old man ranked himself
with draught animals and accepted worldly abuses as natural.
When on rare occasions he was treated as a man should be, he
would feel uncomfortable or awkward.
This old man was elected to the government council for the
Shiliping guerrilla zone. There is surely no need to explain how
deeply he was moved and how many tears of thanks he shed on
that occasion.
This explains why he brought the white horse to the
government yard one evening.
“Mr. Chairman, please send this white horse on my behalf to
Commander Kim Il Sung. Today for the first time in my life I
was treated like a man, thanks to the commander. As a token of
my deep gratitude to him I wish to present my pet horse to him,
the horse which I have fattened for many years. Please convey
140
my thanks to him.”
On learning why the old man had sent the horse to me, I felt it
improper to decline the present.
“I don’t really feel I should accept the gift, but the kindness of
the old man’s heart obliges me to accept it. Please convey my
thanks to him,” I told the official from the Shiliping government,
as I took the tether from him, and then I asked him why so many
people had come when one driver would have been sufficient.
“Commander Kim, we wished to see you on horseback, so the
guerrillas and the people have sent their representatives. Please
mount the horse!” the official said earnestly. The men from the
2nd company, too, insisted that I ride the horse. Only after seeing
me mounted, were the visitors satisfied and returned home to
Shiliping.
I was very grateful to the old man for his kindness and his
respect for me, but I did not ride the horse for many days. I was
afraid that, if I went about on horseback, I might appear
extravagant in the eyes of the people and my men.
I gave the horse to Ri Ung Man, who was working in the
arsenal, the man who had brought a box of Browning pistols in
order to be allowed to join the guerrilla army. He was brave, but
one of his legs had been amputated after a serious wound.
The leg had been amputated by Jang Un Pho, the doctor of the
guerrilla-zone hospital which was located near the battalion
barracks at Xiaolishugou. He represented the medical profession in
Xiaowangqing, the only doctor, but a man of versatile abilities,
141
practising both medicine and surgery, and treating all cases.
The hospital was managed by a mutual aid society, and
patients who needed treatment were required to bring a letter
signed by the chairman of the council of the people’s
revolutionary government. The mutual aid society acted as a
medical council and would often decide that bones damaged by
bullets had to be amputated. Drugs were scarce and no other
remedies were available, so drastic measures had to be taken.
The doctor had improvised a scalpel by grinding down the
spring of a worn-out clock and he used this for surgery. That was
how Ri Ung Man had become a cripple and had been discharged
from the guerrilla army. After leaving hospital, he stayed at Ryang
Song Ryong’s house near the hospital, living under the care of
Ryang’s mother for some time.
Ri Ung Man found the white horse very useful. He rode to and
from the arsenal, cheerful in his life and work.
In the course of time another white horse came into my hands.
It was captured from the Japanese in the battle at Dahuanggou.
Some veterans say that it was captured in the battle of
Zhuanjiaolou, but I don’t think it is worth the trouble of denying
that. Where it came from is not essential. The point is that a horse
which a Japanese officer had ridden about came into our
possession, and it was a perfect war-horse that won everyone’s
admiration.
In that battle I had made some of my men lie in ambush, and the
Japanese officer on the horse was unfortunate enough to be hit first
142
and he fell to the ground. Then a strange thing happened. The
horse, having lost its rider, came running over to the slope where
my command post was located, instead of running away to the
enemy camp.
When he saw the horse, Jo Wal Nam, my orderly, tried to drive
it away towards the road, in case it should attract the enemy’s
attention to the command post. But although the orderly threw tree
stumps and empty cartridges at the horse, the animal would not
return to its dead master, and approached us. However hard the
orderly tried to chase it away, the horse simply balked, with its
legs rooted to the ground.
“Why insist on driving him away when he refuses to go? Don’t
be too cruel,” I rebuked the orderly, and I approached the horse
and stroked its mane.
“He’s attracting the enemy’s attention to the C.P.,” the orderly
shouted in surprise, shielding me with his body. “Take care,
please.”
“Ho, ho! They haven’t got time to try to spot the C.P. They’re
already turning tail.”
In this way the horse came into the possession of the guerrilla
army.
The men tried to describe the incident as something
extraordinary, the strange story of an enemy horse coming over to
our side.
“This animal can tell the difference between Koreans and
Japanese,” said a man who saw its identification tag and
143
discovered it was born in Kyongwon (Saeppyol), Korea. “He came
straight over to us because he recognized us as Koreans.”
“The Japanese officer must have been cruel to his horse,”
another man remarked, as if seeking a more authentic motive for
its action. “Otherwise, it wouldn’t have come over as soon as its
master fell.”
On our way back to Macun from the battle, we gave the horse
to an old Chinese man to use as a work animal. In Jiandao, horses
and cattle were widely used as draught animals.
A few days later, the old man came to us and returned the horse
to us. He said that the horse’s pasterns were too slender and weak
for a draught horse. Worse still, he added, it was so wild that he
could not even approach it or touch it, let alone tame it.
One of my comrades-in-arms said, “This horse is destined to be
one of our company after all.” My comrades advised me to take
the horse, since I was suffering from an ache in my calf muscle.
They even warned me that if I overtaxed the ailing leg in a
guerrilla war that might last for years, I might lose the ability to
stand on my feet. The ache in my calf muscle actually bothered me
considerably whenever I was on the march. The problem probably
came from doing too much walking since my childhood. When I
was in Jilin I travelled by rail or bicycle now and then, but in
Wangqing, which was under constant blockade, such luxury could
not be expected. The painful leg was a great physical handicap to
me in the life of the guerrilla zone, which required forced marches
of dozens or even a hundred miles over steep mountains almost
144
every day.
However, on this occasion also I declined to accept the advice
of my comrades-in-arms.
Then the comrades called a party meeting and adopted a
decision to the effect that I should travel by horse from a certain
date. The decision was tactfully worded so that the battalion
commander, Ryang Song Ryong, too, should ride a horse.
Probably they anticipated that I would doggedly refuse if I was the
only one to be mounted.
I obeyed the decision of the organization.
On the day when I first mounted the horse, my comrades
surrounded me, clapping their hands in delight.
The horse’s records said that it came from the Kyongwon warhorse replacement centre. Sometimes the sleek horse appeared
greyish, sometimes snow-white. His pasterns were as slender as
those of a race-horse, and he ran as fast as a tiger.
This horse carried me on his back to battlefields and sometimes
through primeval forests for approximately two years, sharing
every hardship with me. His image still rises out of my memory
now and then, thrilling me with emotion.
My daily routine began with tending of the horse. I would rise
early in the morning, pat him on the head and brush his coat with a
broom. As I had had no experience of tending a horse, I did just as
my grandfather in Mangyongdae had done when he tended a cow.
The horse jerked away whenever the broom touched him. Once
when I was struggling with the horse, old man Ri Chi Baek gave
145
me a metal comb, and told me to comb the horse’s back with it and
see what would happen. I did as I was told, and the horse stood
quiet with his hoofs stuck to the ground.
While saddling the horse one day, I discovered a pouch between
the saddle-leather and the padding. The pouch contained a small
notebook inscribed “Horse’s Record,” a metal comb, a brush, a
piece of rug, and a pointed piece of steel. I could guess the use of
all of the things except for the piece of steel shaped like a scalpel.
I picked up the steel tool and approached the horse.
Now came the miracle. He lifted one leg high, as a circus horse
might. This suggested some relationship between the tool and his
hoof, but I could not pinpoint exactly what. He circled around me
a few times, then approached a stake a little distance from me, and
rested one of his forelegs on it. I found dirt, stone splinters, and
pieces of straw stuck between his sole and shoe. I removed them
from his hoof, and then he lifted another hoof on the stake and
looked at me as if in invitation.
While I was learning from guess-work how to tend the horse, a
man from a horse-breeding farm in the homeland came to visit a
relation in Xiaowangqing. He taught me the skills of grooming and
horsemanship before he left for home. A horse detested its body
getting dirty and splinters of pottery and similar things getting
stuck in its hoofs, he said, so that it should be washed with clean
water twice every day, combed, brushed and oiled, and dirt and
straw pieces regularly removed from its hoofs. He made a point of
wiping the horse well when it had been sweating or had been
146
exposed to the rain.
He also told me that hay and oats were essential food for horses,
that barley and beans were also good, that horses must eat a little
salt every day as human beings do, and that too much cold water
was bad for them after heavy exercise.
In the course of tending the horse as I had been instructed, I got
to know him better. He was always obedient to me. I was surprised
at the cleverness with which he understood from my glances and
hand movements what he should do, and he never failed to serve
me to my satisfaction. As I caught glimpses of his character and
noticed actions that reminded me of their artistically perfect beauty
of human qualities which would win universal admiration, I
sometimes wondered if this was really an animal and not a human
being.
While he was clever and faithful to me, the white horse was
also fierce. He tolerated no one except his master touching him or
sitting on him. If some tomfool took his tether out of curiosity and
tried to mount him, he avoided him by walking in a circle or
kicking or threatening to bite.
Jo Wal Nam was one of those who was given the cold shoulder
by him. First he stood the horse by the veranda and then, after
gently combing his side, jumped swiftly into the saddle. But the
moment his buttocks touched the saddle, the horse shied off to one
side and he fell to the ground with a thud.
After this shameful defeat, the orderly hit upon a bright idea. He
took the horse to soft ground, where his pasterns sank into the
147
mud, and while he was grazing, he slid onto his back. He failed
again. He was thrown into the mud.
Next the young orderly tied the horse to a tree and gave vent to
his anger by whipping him. After the incident, the horse ran away
or kicked at him whenever he approached.
The orderly even cried in his exasperation. For all the efforts he
had made to tame the animal, he could not even approach him, still
less ride him. In the end he said he had to return to his company.
I said to him that the horse rejected him because he did not love
him, and that, therefore, he should try to feel warmer devotion for
him. I taught him how to tend the horse with great care.
The orderly followed my advice, and the horse naturally obeyed
him in proportion to his kindness.
Time has obscured many details of my memories, but I can still
picture a few events vividly.
Once I went to Luozigou to carry out political work among the
people. O Paek Ryong and his platoon accompanied me. In those
days, I used to sleep only two to three hours a day. The day’s
battle, training my men, and work among the people usually kept
me awake until one or two o’clock in the morning, and sometimes
right through the night.
When our company reached the foot of the Jiapigou Pass, I
dozed off on horseback. Perhaps I had stayed up all night at Macun
or at Shiliping the previous night. As the white horse was
marching at the head of the platoon, nobody noticed that I was
dozing.
148
As we began climbing the pass, the horse’s gait changed.
The platoon leader O Paek Ryong noticed it.
The horse was scaling the slope carefully with his forelegs
drawn in, and pace of the march was so slow that the platoon
leader was irritated.
“How strangely he is walking today, this horse which is like an
English gentleman!” O Paek Ryong thought to himself.
On the downslope, too, the horse walked with difficulty, his
hind legs drawn in. In the meantime, the column far outmarched
me, leaving myself on horseback and O Paek Ryong behind. The
platoon leader was impatient with the horse, and worried about
me, but he dared not lash the horse on which his commander was
riding.
When he had climbed down the slope, the horse balked before a
fallen tree on the Jiapigou Riverside. Seeing the horse, which
normally leapt such fallen trees without any difficulty, hesitating
before a small obstacle, O Paek Ryong grew even more suspicious.
“Why does the commander leave this lazy horse alone, without
so much as shouting at him or spurring him on?” the platoon
leader thought, looking up at me. Only then did he discover that I
was dozing.
“What a fine show!” the platoon leader exclaimed aloud.
The horse’s foreleg tapped on the fallen tree, and the sound
woke me up.
“This white horse should be given a feast today,” O Paek
Ryong said, beaming with a broad smile and stroking the horse’s
149
nape. I felt a great change must have taken place in the universe
while I was asleep.
“Why a feast all of a sudden?”
The platoon leader explained to me with great enthusiasm how
the horse had climbed over the pass and how he behaved when
faced with the fallen tree.
“My father said that in ancient times the best horse in the
country was called the state horse, so what about calling him that
from now on?” the platoon leader suggested.
“Why should we simply call him a state horse? Your story
proves that he is more than worthy of being called the heavenly
horse....”
“What does the heavenly horse mean?”
“It means the best horse under heaven.”
“Then let us call him the heavenly horse. Brother O Jung Hwa
once told me that in some country a high title was awarded to a
horse.”
“So I’ve heard. The emperor of that country conferred the title
of political administrator on his pet horse. His horse ate from an
ivory trough and drank wine from a gold cup, and enjoyed respect
from everyone. Shall we give him the title of Ryonguijong (a
feudal post corresponding to the modern post of prime minister–
Tr.)?”
“Anyway, this is a quite uncommon horse. He has no eyes in
his back, how could he know that you were asleep?”
I spurred the horse, and he jumped over the fallen tree and
150
rushed forward. We overtook the platoon in an instant and arrived
at the vicinity of the valley of Sandaohezi, Luozigou, where rocky
peaks soared high on both sides of a stream which teemed with
trout.
I drew a circle around the horse on the grass, and then coiled his
tether around his neck. I gave the men their assignments for
political work among the people at Sandaohezi, Sidaohezi and
Laomuzhuhe. After dispatching them to their various destinations,
I met the political operatives and the workers in charge of
underground organizations who had been waiting for me by the
riverside. I talked to them for a long time.
When I returned to the horse after all this talk, I was surprised
yet again, for the horse was grazing within the circle I had drawn.
It was indeed a rare horse.
The horse also helped to save the life of Hong Hye Song, a
woman revolutionary. She had gone through high-school
education in the homeland, worked underground along with
progressive students and young people in Longjing, and then come
to Wangqing which she regarded as the promised land, and was
doing political work there.
Her father was a renowned doctor of traditional Koryo
medicine. In the guerrilla zone, Hong Hye Song was able to draw
on the medical expertise she had learnt from her father to give the
guerrillas and the local inhabitants great help by treating scabies.
This cheerful, sociable, courageous, and pretty woman political
worker with a knowledge of Koryo medicine was warmly loved by
151
the soldiers and people in the guerrilla zone.
One day I was riding on the horse, as I went with my orderly to
the village of Xidapo in order to carry out political work among
the villagers. When we were not far from the village, we heard a
sudden gun shot. Suspecting an invasion by the “punitive” force,
we hurried toward the place from which the sound had come. We
found Hong Hye Song who was caught in an enemy ambush on
her way back after her political work in villages and fighting
against heavy odds.
The enemy was shouting and threatening her with blank fire in
an attempt to capture her alive.
I spurred my horse on towards her where on the brink of being
taken prisoner, she was returning the enemy fire, and picked her up
instantly. The horse, sensing my intention, shot off like an arrow
and galloped for a couple of miles. Hong Hye Song was saved.
After that the horse became an object of universal admiration to
the people in the guerrilla zone.
If she had not been killed in the enemy’s “punitive” action at
Baicaogou, Hong Hye Song would now be gratefully sharing with
me in my recollections of the white horse.
I rode the horse to Liangshuiquanzi many times when I was
building up a semi-guerrilla zone there. Our organizations were
active in the villages of Nandadong, Beidadong, Shitouhezi and
Kajaegol around Liangshuiquanzi and also in villages in the
vicinity of Tumen, as well as in Luozigou, Sandaohezi, Sidaohezi,
Laomuzhuhe and Taipinggou.
152
If I say that I nearly gave up this wonderful war-horse, the
reader will not believe me.
It happened when, together with the men of O Paek Ryong’s
platoon, I was working among the people in the Gufang Mountains
or a place nearby. Circumstances obliged me to decide to part with
the horse. It was the time of the spring food-shortage, and the
people were suffering from lack of food.
We attacked the enemy near that place on several occasions,
capturing food and distributing it among the people. But the
amount was too little to meet their need. We ourselves ate
sparingly at each meal in order to save food grain for the people.
In the circumstances, the horse’s rations also had to be cut to the
minimum. Even grain stalks to replace hay were scarce, to say
nothing of oats, barley and beans, the nutritious feeds.
My loyal men spared no efforts to obtain feed for the horse.
However difficult the situation, they worked hard to find oats and
salt for the horse by going to neighbouring villages and even
visiting people in the enemy-held areas. Some of the men even
went out to glean harvested fields. They threshed the gleanings and
put the grain in their pockets to give to the horse when they came
back. When they approached the horse, he would poke his nose
into their pockets.
They took loving care of the horse for my sake. Their devoted
efforts were an expression of revolutionary comradeship and
loyalty to me.
I was thankful to them for their friendship and loyalty, but I felt
153
very sad and uneasy. Whenever I saw them working with such
great enthusiasm to obtain feed for the horse or care for it, I was
haunted by the thought that I should no longer put them to such
trouble simply for my sake. I was not used to accepting such
services from other people. If anybody were to ask me when I felt
most awkward during the years of the guerrilla war, I would
answer that it was when I was treated unusually well by my men.
Whenever special benefits or privileges were offered to me, I
felt sorry and guilty rather superior or self-satisfied, as if I were
being put to the test.
Although the aching muscle in my calf was not cured and I
would have to suffer for a few months longer, I made up my mind
to give my pet horse to a peasant so as to relieve my men of this
burden. If the horse was used as a draught animal in a semiguerrilla zone, it would not be exposed to the dangers of the
battlefield. I thought at first of giving it to the old man who had
once been a servant and had given me his white horse, but I
dismissed the idea for fear that he might feel embarrassed and
upset.
I summoned the duty officer and told him to prepare a special
noon meal for the horse even if it used up all the remaining feed.
“Feed the white horse with the best of the provisions today.
Take him to the chairman of the Anti-Japanese Association of the
village beyond the mountain in the afternoon. The remaining feed
should be sent with the horse. Tell the chairman to give the horse
to the poorest peasant who has no draught animal.”
154
“Yes, sir,” answered the duty officer, but he hesitated to leave.
“Go and do as you were told.” I urged him sternly.
When the duty officer was gone, I thought things over, and
regretted having given such cruel orders to send the white horse
away. I went out of the room to bid farewell to him. As usual, I
combed him and brushed him all over and stroked his nape many
times. As I looked back upon the thousands of miles I had
travelled with the horse, I felt as if my heart were breaking.
Then I was surprised to see tears trickling from his eyes as they
were fixed on me. It was really astonishing that he should have a
premonition of parting. The horse had evidently read my mind
from my look.
For the first time in my life I realized that even in the world of
beasts slaved under the lash, there were beautiful emotions that
would increase and enhance the beauty of the human world.
“Forgive me, my pet. Though I am sad, I must bid farewell to you.
Though the pain of our parting is tearing me apart, I cannot afford the
luxury of riding about on you any longer. All the sufferings and
hardships you have gone through for my sake will live in my memory
as long as I live,” I thought, as I stood with my face buried in his neck
for a long time.
Back in my room, I felt lonely for the rest of the day and could
do no work. I even wondered whether I had made a foolish
decision out of too great concern for saving face. But it would be
absurd to change the decision that was already made. I waited for
the evening report from the duty officer, hoping that the white
155
horse would be given to a hard-working and kindly man.
But the officer did not turn up at the appointed hour for the
evening report. Instead, platoon leader O Paek Ryong brought me
my evening meal as dusk was falling. Without any preliminaries,
he simply begged me to forgive him.
“I have violated discipline, so punish me, please.”
“Violated discipline?” I could not see what he meant.
“I have raided a lumber station, without obtaining your
approval in advance.”
He hastily explained why he had done it. The duty officer who
received my orders in the morning, had gone to O Paek Ryong and
told him about the orders, and that he would obey any orders from
me except orders about the horse. He had asked him to discuss the
matter.
O Paek Ryong sympathized with him. He told the duty officer:
“Perhaps the commander gave the orders because he was
sorry to see his men taking so much trouble over the horse. But
how can we allow the horse to be taken away from our
commander, when he is still suffering from the aching muscle
in his calf? If we find plenty of feed and then beg him to
withdraw his orders, he may reconsider the matter. You should
keep the horse out of sight for a while, instead of sending it to
the neighbouring village. And I will go to the Qinhe lumber
station to get feed. Don’t tell the commander where I’ve gone.”
The lumber station was a little more than ten miles from
Xiaowangqing. One of the foremen was an acquaintance of O Paek
156
Ryong. They had probably got to know each other during the
foreman’s frequent visits to the guerrilla zone to fell trees.
The platoon leader went to the lumber station with a foraging
party of several men. Saying that if he gave the feed to the
guerrillas he might get into trouble, the foreman told the platoon
leader to raid the lumber station instead.
Realizing that the foreman’s suggestion was reasonable, O Paek
Ryong arrested the sentry, then broke into the office where the
other sentries and supervisors were gambling, and disarmed them
instantly. The raiding party returned safely to base carrying with
them four or five sacks of oats and beans.
I put aside my evening meal and went out of the room. The
horse was in the stable, having been brought back from the hiding
place.
He snorted, and nodded his head towards me as if in thanks.
I felt my nose tingle. I was glad to see the horse again. But how
should I deal with the duty officer and O Paek Ryong who was
reckless as a bear in Mt. Paektu and had plenty of guts, these men
who had disobeyed their orders? How preposterous O Paek Ryong
had been in thinking that his commander would withdraw his
orders if plenty of feed was obtained, and how absurd ways his
guts had led him to raid a lumber station! Though I was grateful to
him, I was appalled at the thought of the catastrophe his
recklessness might bring on us in the days to come, if it was not
nipped in the bud.
The irony was that I, who never compromised with principle,
157
could not assert principle at the moment. I brushed the horse
lightly on the back, and, when I saw him nodding with tears in his
eyes, I did not feel like rebuking the platoon leader for disobeying
the orders.
Moreover, his stubborn attitude made me disinclined to force
him to send the horse away.
“Comrade Commander, please punish me or demote me, but I
hope you’ll understand that the horse must not be sent away
anywhere as long as I am alive.”
Having pronounced his ultimatum, he snorted as if he just
fought a major battle.
I suppressed the impulse to hug him and pat him on the back in
a show of thanks. More than once had I been moved by the loyalty
of this peerlessly courageous platoon leader who had not hesitated
to plunge through fire and water for me. He had followed me and
respected me as he would his own elder brother, saying that it was
Kim Il Sung who taught him to read and write the Korean
alphabet, and it was
Kim Il Sung who had opened his eyes to the things of the world.
I had also loved him and cared lovingly for him as I would for
my own brother. This platoon leader whom I myself had trained
had now raided the lumber station at the risk of his own life in
order to save the white horse for me.
But for all this, he had committed a gross violation of discipline
by foraging without approval from his commander. If he was
forgiven, he might commit even a graver mistake. What was to be
158
done?
A commander needs to make a wise decision at such a moment.
“The soup is getting cold,” he said worriedly looking down at
the steaming bowl. “Please take your meal and punish me
quickly.”
I held back the hot tears in my eyes. I felt a lump in my throat at
his staunch readiness to accept punishment.
When he was a member of the Children’s Vanguard, O Paek
Ryong had crossed to Onsong in the homeland with a pijikkae
(matchlock) pistol he himself had made, shot a policeman at the
customs house and snatched a rifle from him. He was as audacious
as that as a boy. He had experienced all the hardships of life;
growing up in a family of seventeen, he had sympathized sincerely
and passionately with suffering people from his childhood. For this
he was loved by all his comrades.
From his days in the Children’s Vanguard, he was eager to join
the guerrilla army. His antics included an episode involving empty
cartridges: He once heard that an applicant for the guerrilla army
needed a trustworthy reference or a rifle the applicant himself had
captured from the enemy, or at the very least a stick grenade as a
substitute for a reference. So he went to a battlefield where fire had
just been exchanged. He tied the bottoms of his trousers with
string, and then he held the waist of his trousers open with one
hand while he gathered cartridges, live and empty, with the other
hand and filled the legs of the trousers with them. Then, he came
to the guerrilla army base, sweating all over. As he untied the legs
159
of his trousers, nearly a gallon of cartridges poured out.
“How about that?” he said, looking elatedly at the company
commander. “Is this enough for me to be accepted?”
Instead of the answer he expected from the company
commander, he saw the guerrillas burst into roars of laughter.
“Look here, Paek Ryong!” the company commander said,
laughing. “What did you bring these empty cartridges for?
They’ve already been used.”
O Paek Ryong had thought that the empty cartridges could kill
the enemy. When he realized his mistake, he sorted the live
cartridges from the useless ones. The number came to hundreds.
So, the cartridges did serve as a reliable reference for him to
join the guerrilla army.
Since enlisting he had fought courageously to take vengeance
on the Japanese “punitive” troops for the deaths of his parents and
brothers. As a raw recruit, he had many distressing experience.
Once, while cleaning his rifle, he had let off an accidental shot and
been punished for it.
The political instructor who punished him was an enemy spy.
He had got himself promoted to company political instructor by
worming his way into the confidence of factionalists who held
important posts in the east Manchuria ad hoc committee and the
county party committee, and was doing everything possible to
undermine the guerrilla army.
The punishment he meted out to O Paek Ryong for the
accidental shot was brutal and barbarous in terms of the code of
160
discipline and morals of the revolutionary army. As punishment he
sent O Paek Ryong to the walled town of Mudan, where a
company of the puppet Manchukuo army was stationed, with
orders to take down and bring back the Manchukuo flag flying in
the centre of the town. The orders, in fact, were intended to get
him killed during this adventure in the enemy’s den. His
comrades-in-arms had all been worried that he would never return
alive.
O Paek Ryong, however, went off to the town, which was 25
miles away from his company, and came back safely with the flag.
After that the spy in the guise of political instructor watched for
a chance to do away with O Paek Ryong. He even went so far as to
start an argument with the men who ate their rice in water. He
preached that soldiers should eat solid food, without soup.
Once the company butchered a cow. The men, tired of eating
“dry food,” were delighted at the thought of eating their fill of beef
soup that evening.
That evening, however, the dastardly political instructor had
appeared again and said that if the men ate beef soup when they
were not used to it, they would have loose bowels, and ordered
them to eat only rice and meat, not the soup. So the men were
denied the chance of eating the soup which they had been looking
forward to.
Only O Paek Ryong and one other man disobeyed the orders
and ate the soup. The wife of O Paek Ryong’s second eldest
brother, who was a cook, brought them the soup in secret. As bad
161
luck would have it, O Paek Ryong was caught by the political
instructor in the act of eating the soup behind a stack of firewood
in the yard of the barracks. This incident gave the spy a pretext for
labelling him a “Minsaengdan” member. Had it not been for the
references given by his comrades-in-arms, O Paek Ryong would
have been executed on the false charge of belonging to the
“Minsaengdan.”
The spy’s identity was later discovered and he was executed by
O Paek Ryong.
O Paek Ryong had virtually been condemned to death penalty
and it still rankled in his mind. If he was subjected to another
penalty, wouldn’t it leave an even worse scar?
“Comrade O, I am grateful to you for taking the risk of raiding
the enemy camp for the sake of the white horse. But your breach
of discipline is a grave error that must not be repeated by a
commanding officer. This sort of thing must not recur. As I
understand your feelings, I will not send away the white horse.
Well, are you satisfied?”
“Yes, I am satisfied,” the platoon leader replied with a grin on
his face. Then he scampered off to his quarters like a child.
I settled his case with these few words of remonstration.
In the years that followed, the white horse served me as
faithfully as ever.
I still remember an event that took place when the battle to
defend Xiaowangqing was raging. At that time the enemy was
invading Hwanggarigol at the end of the valley of Lishugou and
162
killing the people in the guerrilla zone. The mountains and fields
were littered with dead bodies, and the houses were reduced to
ashes.
I spent every day galloping about on my horse, commanding
my men in the battle, in the thick of the fire. One day I organized
the defences on Mt. Ppyojok, the next day I halted the charging
enemy on Mapanshan, and the next day I provided covering fire
for the evacuees from the hill behind Lishugou. In the course of
this whirlwind of battle, I went through many hair-raising
incidents.
In the barrage of fire, even the fur lining of my overcoat caught
fire. The flames could have enveloped me in an instant, but I did
not notice it. As my horse was galloping against the wind, the
flames on the skirt of my coat flew out behind me.
It was only when the horse began to run with the wind that I
discovered the flames on my coat. I had no time to pull it off, and
if I jumped from the rushing horse, I might collide with a rock and
kill or seriously injure myself.
At this critical moment, the horse slowed down in front of a
snow-covered depression and then slid into it sideways, with his
forelegs folded in. I stumbled into the snow, and the fire on my
coat was put out as I rolled over in it.
The horse’s two legs were bleeding.
Had it not been for the horse, I would have suffered fatal burns
and not survived to tell the tale.
I marvelled at the horse’s seemingly supernatural powers. How
163
could he sense that I was in a fire? It still remains a mystery to me.
His unusual clarity of judgement might be attributed to animal
instincts, but to what can one attribute his loyal devotion, the selfsacrificing devotion which led him to save his master, while
injuring his own legs?
The expression says “a faithful dog and a pet horse,” but I
would rather change the word order and say “a faithful horse and a
pet dog.”
The white horse became a legend, beloved of all the people in
the guerrilla zone. The story of the horse spread to the semiguerrilla zones around Xiaowangqing and even to the enemy-ruled
areas.
Wu Yi-cheng, too, heard the story and coveted the horse.
“Commander Kim, wouldn’t you exchange your white horse for
fifty war-horses?” he asked when I was at Luozigou negotiating
with him for the formation of a common front with the Chinese
anti-Japanese nationalist forces.
I do not remember what I said to him in reply. I only remember
that I returned to Macun on the same horse after the negotiations.
The white horse that had carried me over thousands of miles of
wet and dry trails for nearly two years, with his shoes changed
only occasionally, died at Xiaowangqing in the winter of 1934.
When I returned from the first expedition to north Manchuria, I
found the stable empty. They led me to the horse’s solitary grave,
where the earth had been mounded up by my comrades-in-arms. I
did not know how to express the depth of my sorrow.
164
Seeing how grieved I was, my men suggested firing gun salutes
to the horse. But I declined, asking what was the use of a gun
salute, for the horse had lived among the roar of guns all his life,
so he should be allowed some peace at least in his grave. The
grave is somewhere in Wangqing.
One day in the early 1960s, when O Paek Ryong was the head
of the General Bureau of Guards, he and I went for a casual ride,
and we reminisced about the white horse. Even though several
decades had passed, the former leader of a guerrilla platoon could
recall every detail of the horse’s story.
Somehow the story became known to writers, Song Yong and
Ri Ki Yong. An officer is said to have asked them to write about
the white horse, but I am not sure how the matter came up and how
it was settled.
The white horse that was born of the flames of the war against
the Japanese and lived through fire all his life appeared on a small
piece of canvas in the Korean Revolution Museum. The legendary
anecdote of the white horse came to the attention of the artist Jong
Kwan Chol perhaps through Ri Ki Yong or Song Yong. Jong
Kwan Chol painted the subject in oils. I discovered the picture
when I visited the museum at the suggestion of O Paek Ryong. It
depicted me and the white horse. The canvas reminded me of the
orderlies and O Paek Ryong, who had shared the horse’s loyalty to
me. I suggested that it would have been even better if these
comrades had been shown together, and the artist changed the
picture, following my advice, to include two orderlies. That is the
165
picture now on exhibition in the museum.
Whenever I missed those loyal orderlies and the white horse, I
used to go to see them in the museum.
Nowadays, at the age of eighty, I occasionally picture them
only in my memory. The image of my faithful white horse still
moves as vividly before my eyes as he did sixty years ago.
If he had been a human being he would have won higher
commendation than the most loyal of men.
166
CHAPTER 8
Under the Banner of
the Antl–Japanese
Struggle
Ri Kwang
Negotiations with Wu Yi-cheng
The Battle of the Dongning County Town
A Comment on Ultra-Democracy in the Army
Operation Macun
Arsenals in the Thick Forests
An Immortal Flower
February 1934-October 1934
167
1. Ri Kwang
I made friends with Ri Kwang in Jilin.
One day Kim Jun and his company from the General Federation
of Korean Youth in East Manchuria brought a young man to me
and introduced him. He was Ri Kwang.
Our comrades had assumed from his appearance in Jilin that he
had come either to study, to get in touch with an organization, or to
learn how the student and youth movement was progressing. Kim
Jun hinted to me that Ri Kwang seemed to have come to Jilin to
attend a secret provincial meeting of teachers.
My first impression of Ri Kwang was that he appeared
intelligent and magnanimous, but reticent. In the course of
repeated contacts thereafter I learned that he was indeed a young
man of exceptional sensitivity, with a kind heart and the ability to
form strong friendships.
My comrades were charmed when they met Ri Kwang, and they
tried to persuade him to settle in Jilin, even suggesting to him that
the Wenguang Middle School would be good for developing his
knowledge, that the Law College would give him an ideal start in
life, and that the Yuwen Middle School would be best for a man
168
who wished to become a revolutionary.
Ri Kwang himself did not wish to leave Jilin. He said that, in
his primary school days at Guchengzi, Yanji County, he had
visited Jilin several times on errands for leaders of the
Independence Army, that the life of the young people and students
had now changed beyond recognition, and that the city was now
buzzing with the social campaigns organized by students, whereas
in previous years the young people had been so lethargic that their
campaign had gone almost unnoticed. So Ri Kwang stayed and
attended Middle School No. 5 in Jilin for some time.
In his early days Ri Kwang had been influenced mostly by the
Korean Independence Army leaders, such as Hong Pom Do, Kim
Jwa Jin, Hwang Pyong Gil and Choe Myong Rok. The
headquarters of an Independence Army unit had been billeted on
his wife’s parents’ house at Guchengzi for a long time, so he had
met many leaders of the nationalist movement. Ri Kwang was
sharp-eyed, quick-witted and modest and he attracted the attention
of the Independence Army leaders. They seemed to have tried to
make him heir to the cause of the Independence Army, just as O
Tong Jin and Ri Ung had tried to make me their successor.
During his boyhood Ri Kwang had learned Chinese characters
at the village school which was run by his mother’s father. As his
father’s health was poor, he had given up the idea of going to
secondary school, and at the age of 14, he began to help his father
support the family. At the tender age of 16 he began to manage the
household affairs as effective head of the family, and his modern
169
schooling was therefore delayed. After graduating from school he
taught at primary schools in Yanji and Wangqing for some time.
Until that time he had been known by his real name Ri Myong
Chun. But from the time he started teaching at Beihamatang in
Chunhua Sub-county he was known by the nickname Ri Kwang.
In those days eight schools at Beihamatang and its neighbourhood
used to hold joint debating contests and athletic meets as part of
the enlightenment movement, and Ri Kwang who was working
underground, used to compete for the football team of Hamatang,
using his nickname. From that time onwards everybody called him
Ri Kwang.
“It was the Independence Army that guided me to nationalism
and it was the independence movement that led me to
communism,” he said to me when we first met, recollecting the
days in Guchengzi.
His words sounded very strange to me.
“How could that be, did the old men of the Independence Army
teach you two thoughts at a time?”
“No, I wasn’t exactly taught. How can I explain? I should really
say that they influenced me, and there were both nationalist and
Marxist-Leninist influences.”
“The old men must have been double-dealers?”
“I would say they were seeking a shift of direction, rather than
double-dealing. While leading the Independence Army movement,
they read communist books in secret. When I visited the house of my
wife’s parents, I saw in a corner of a room lots of the books the old
170
men were reading. So I began to read them, too, to kill time–but now I
simply enjoy reading them.”
I squeezed Ri Kwang’s hand, and said. “I am glad to meet a
man who espouses communism.”
Ri Kwang waved his hand in a hasty gesture, saying:
“No. I am not yet a communist. There are quite a few concepts I
cannot understand among the communist principles advanced by
Marx and Lenin. To my simple eyes, the communist ideal appears
somehow too fantastic. You may feel sorry to hear this, Comrade
Song Ju, but I hope you will understand that I am speaking
frankly.”
I liked his candidness during our first conversation. It was this,
more than anything else, which attracted me to him.
At the time Ri Kwang was neither a nationalist nor a
communist. In short, he was in the process of changing his
direction. In the course of his association with us in Jilin he
became a communist, but he did not join the Young Communist
League or Anti-Imperialist Youth League which we had organized.
An informed source states that when he was coming to Jilin, Ri
Kwang mortgaged some of his school’s ten hectares or so of land
for 400 yuan for travel expenses, but I am not sure this story is
authentic. The school lands had been allocated by the state for the
running of educational institutions. So if it is true that he took the
risk of mortgaging such public property, he must have been very
ambitious.
In a letter to his brother-in-law which he sent after he left home,
171
he is said to have expressed the following grim resolve:
“I think I must find a true patriot even if I have to comb the
whole of Manchuria and the Korean peninsula. It may take me ten
years or twenty years to do this. However, I pledge myself not to
return to my paternal home until I succeed.”
His determination gives us a glimpse of his character, and
explains why he left his home and travelled round all the major
cities and political centres of Manchuria.
Ri Kwang was honest, meticulous and resourceful. He spoke
Chinese as fluently as a northeastern Chinese. Therefore, he was
competent to perform the job of a headman of ten households, a
hundred households, or even of a sub-county in the later days.
It was from him that I, who come from a northwestern province
of Korea, learned the customs of Jiandao and Hamgyong Province.
While in Jilin, for some unknown reasons Ri Kwang did not wish
to join us in the organizational life. He was probably in the mood of a
traveller who was only stopping over at Jilin. However, he frequently
kept company with me. Later, through me, he became a close friend of
my mother.
He met my mother when he was returning to Jiandao after
studying in Jilin. Before his departure he came to see me and as he
took his farewell, he casually said:
“Song Ju, when I return to Jiandao I wish to drop in at Fusong
to see your mother. Do you mind?”
“No. It isn’t like you, Ri Kwang, to ask about such a thing. If
you want to see her, you should go to see her. Why should you
172
need my permission?” I was grateful to him for his suggestion.
“So you agree. Good! I will see your mother as I have decided
to. Everyone follows your mother’s lead and calls her ‘our
mother,’ but I haven’t even made a courtesy call on her. How
impolite I have been! Why should she be mother only to Kim
Hyok and Kye Yong Chun, and not to me?”
“Thank you, Ri Kwang! Now my mother will have another son.
From today we are brothers.”
“Then, we should drink a toast together, or at least make a visit
to the noodle shop together, shouldn’t we?”
Needless to say, we did both.
He paid a visit to my mother at Fusong, spending a few days in
her company, before going to Wangqing. In those days his family
was living in Wangqing County, not at Yilangou in Yanji County.
After Ri Kwang left Fusong, mother sent me a letter, telling me
a lot about him. The letter said:
“Song Ju, Ri Kwang left today for Jiandao. I saw him off at the
ferry on the River Songhua. I feel so lonely, just as I did when I
said goodbye to you, that I don’t feel like working today. He is so
affable! Strange to say, I feel as if he were one of my own sons. He
himself said that he felt as if I were his own mother. My heart
overflows as I think of taking more and more sturdy boys under
my wing as the days pass by. Can there be any greater pleasure
than this in the world? You have introduced a really fine boy to
me. He took Chol Ju with him to Yangdicun, paid obeisance at
father’s grave and cropped the weeds on the mound. Many of your
173
friends have been to my home, and I know many young men, but
this is the first time I have met such a lovable boy as Ri Kwang. I
hope your friendship will thrive like the green pines on the
southern hill.”
On the day I received the letter I walked in buoyant mood on
the bank of the River Songhua all day long. The joy my mother
expressed in every line of the letter affected me greatly. If she was
happy, I was happy; and if she was satisfied, I was satisfied. If
meeting Ri Kwang gave her such great satisfaction, I was equally
delighted.
After Ri Kwang left Jilin, I received a money order from the
post office.
Many people assisted me financially while I attended the
Yuwen Middle School in Jilin, as I have mentioned on various
occasions. Those who gave me money for my school expenses
were mostly my father’s friends such as O Tong Jin, Son Jong Do,
Ryang Se Bong, Jang Chol Ho and Hyon Muk Gwan, who lived in
Jilin or came frequently to report to the headquarters of the Jonguibu from the bases of the Independence Army, for instance, from
Liuhe, Xingjing, Fusong and Huadian.
My patrons in my Jilin days included members of the Young
Communist League and the Ryugil Association of Korean
Students in Jilin. Sin Yong Gun, who was working as an activist of
the Young Communist League while attending the Wenguang
Middle School, also contributed to my school expenses, though he
was far from rich.
174
As I have already mentioned, in those days my mother earned
only five to ten fen a day by taking, in sewing. If she earned ten
fen a day on average, her monthly earning was three yuan, which
was just enough to pay my monthly school fees at the Yuwen
Middle School.
She did not send me the school expenses by post, in order to
save the cost of postage. She used to save her daily earnings until
she had enough for the monthly school fees and then send them
with someone she knew travelling to Jilin. This saved me the
trouble of calling at the post office.
I used to accept the money from my mother with mixed
feelings. There was a feeling of relief at not having to worry about
being disgraced by failing to pay my school fees; but there was
also a feeling of concern for my family, who would have to get by
without any money.
In fact, three yuan was a trifling amount, scarcely enough for a
rich man’s son to buy himself lunch. Most of the students at the
Yuwen Middle School came from rich families. Sometimes scores
of money orders, which we called “slips,” would arrive for the rich
men’s sons at school in a single day. On these occasions the
children of poor people like myself, who scarcely knew what a
money order looked like, went about in low spirits.
In this context, the arrival of ten yuan for me, one of the poor
students, was a great event.
As I took the money order to the post office, I tried to guess
who might have sent it.
175
But I could not think of any relations or acquaintances who
could send me so much money at one time. The only person who
might send money to me at Jilin was my mother, but it would be
impossible for her to send so much. I thought the money might
have come to the wrong person because of a mistake by the clerk
at the post office, but such a mistake seemed very unlikely.
If a person who received a money order could not name the
sender at the post office, the clerk could refuse to pay. On that day,
however, the clerk paid without even asking me the sender’s name.
Instead, I asked the clerk who had sent the order. “It is from Ri
Kwang!” the voice behind the partition replied. I was surprised: I
had many closer friends than Ri Kwang, even though we had
become close friends by the time he left Jilin. I had never imagined
that he would send me money.
I was deeply moved by his generosity.
While he was in Wangqing, Ri Kwang frequently visited my
home, bringing many packages of medicine and money for my
mother who was living at Xinglongcun, Antu County. The money
was his monthly savings from his wages as the headman of a
hundred households. He was extremely kind-hearted and
charitable to the needy.
He used to stay at my mother’s for several days, helping her
around the house, and then returning to Wangqing. He became a
welcome regular visitor to my family.
Whenever I received financial support I regretted my inability
to return the kindness. My family was too poor to pay the money
176
back. I resolved to repay my friends and colleagues by becoming a
loyal son of the country and a faithful servant of my fellow people.
In the winter of 1929, Ri Kwang took a train from Dunhua to
Jilin in order to visit me. I was in prison at the time. He had timed
his journey badly.
Instead of meeting me, he made the acquaintance of Kong Suk
Ja, a waitress at the inn where he was lodging, and from her he
learned the details of the youth and student movement in Jilin,
including the way in which the leaders were guiding the
movement. While assuming the guise of a waitress, Kong Suk Ja,
on assignment from the Young Communist League, maintained a
liaison between us and the young men who came to Jilin to visit
us. She later became Ri Kwang’s second wife as a result of their
acquaintance at the inn. His first wife, Kim Orinnyo, died of
illness.
Ri Kwang was determined not to marry again, so deep was his
grief over his wife’s death. He believed that no woman would
make a better wife than her because they had been devoted to each
other. Within a year of her death, many women had offered him
their hands, but he would not even glance at them.
Whenever we met him, his friends and I tried to persuade Ri
Kwang to get married, at least for the sake of his infirm parents
and his little son. Dissuading him from his resolution proved more
difficult than pressing resin from dry wood. It was only after three
years of mourning for Kim Orinnyo that he accepted my advice.
His second wife Kong Suk Ja was good-natured, wise and
177
virtuous. She raised the orphaned child with such great care that
she won everyone’s admiration. The child, too, regarded her as his
own mother. Unfortunately, Kong Suk Ja had no children of her
own.
Although he could not meet me when I was in prison, with the
help of Kong Suk Ja Ri Kwang made close friends with young
people attending the Yuwen Middle School and the Normal School
in Jilin who were committed to the movement. The Jilin
organization convinced Ri Kwang that all the patriotic forces must
first be united in the cause of national independence, and that in
order to unite the patriotic forces there must be an idea and a line
which would serve as their common banner, as well as a centre of
unity and cohesion. He returned to Jiandao convinced of this.
Ri Kwang’s stay in Jilin was a turning-point in his
revolutionary activity. As a result he was put under surveillance by
the secret agents of the Japanese consulate and the Manchurian
police, but he was never afraid of them and continued
courageously along his new course of action.
The autumn and spring struggles were important events which
proved the correctness of the lessons he had learned in Jilin. His
world-view made a leap to still greater heights as a result of these
struggles.
After he moved to Wangqing, Ri Kwang worked as the subcounty head at Beihamatang. The fact that a man who had declared
his commitment to the great cause of revolution and regarded it as
his exclusive ideal, was appointed as an official at the lowest rung
178
of the enemy’s administrative hierarchy was an event worthy of
considerable interest.
I met Ri Kwang again at Mingyuegou in December 1931.
At that time he was occupied with providing bed and board for
the representatives to the meeting at Mingyuegou that winter.
When I saw him appear at the meeting place with a knapsack full
of foxtail millet and with five pheasants hanging over his
shoulders, I was moved to admiration, and thought that he was a
man worthy of his name.
The starch noodles, a speciality of Jiandao, with a sauce of
minced pheasant and chicken were so delicious that we could not
resist the temptation of asking for a second helping.
After Ri Kwang and I each ate two bowls of noodles at the
same table, we lay in the front room of Ri Chong San’s house with
wooden pillows under our heads, talking through the night.
First of all, I thanked him heartily for helping my mother in her
household affairs and also for sending me money for my school
expenses.
“While I was eating the noodles tonight, I thought a lot. The
efforts you put into preparing the meat sauce moved me to tears.
While I was studying in Jilin you often took me to restaurants. I
don’t know how I can repay your kindness....”
When he heard me say this, he tapped me on my shoulder.
“Don’t mention it. I have helped your family out of my desire to
contribute to the independence movement to which your father
dedicated his whole life. How hard you have been working
179
directing the youth and student movement! It’s only natural to
contribute a little money to such a patriotic family as yours....
Don’t mention it again.”
He pretended to be angry, and gestured threateningly at me with
his hand.
This made me keenly aware of another aspect of his beautiful
character.
“Ri Kwang, don’t be too modest. Kindness should be repaid. I
must thank you again, and also on my mother’s behalf. Frankly, I
had no idea you would give us such wholehearted support.”
“I didn’t suppose you would. But Song Ju, I have my reasons
for doing it.”
“What are your reasons?”
“One day your mother told me how she was married to your
father, as if it were an old folk tale. She said that arranging the
marriage had been by no means easy.”
“I know that. My two brothers and I heard about it from my
mother after her husband passed away. It was a really tearful
story.”
This story takes us back to the years before the “annexation of
Korea by Japan.” A distance of about two miles lay between my
mother’s home at Chilgol and father’s home at Namri, with a low
hill standing between the two villages. Travellers from Namri to
Pyongyang had to go by way of Chilgol. And those from Chilgol
to Nampho had to pass by Namri. The people of the two villages
were on good terms and visited each other frequently. This led to
180
many of them being related by marriage.
My maternal grandfather was looking for a suitable person for a
son-in-law from Namri and the first young man that attracted the
old man’s interest was none other than my father. When a
matchmaker had begun to come and go between the two houses,
mother’s father came first to my father’s house at Namri to see
him. However, he returned to Chilgol undecided, because the
young man’s family was living in dire poverty, although he
thought the young man himself was acceptable. If his daughter was
married to such a poor family she would have to suffer hardship all
her life, the old man thought. But even after that he visited my
father as many as five times.
My father’s family, being destitute, were not able to serve a
proper lunch to this person who might become an in-law, on any of
his six visits.
Only after the sixth visit did my mother’s father consult with his
wife and send a letter agreeing to the engagement.
“Song Ju, this story has given me a better understanding of your
family. You will be surprised if I tell you that I knew of the crab
incident, won’t you?”
I was, indeed, surprised to hear Ri Kwang mention the crab
affair. This was an old family event of which only a few members
including mother, grandfather Po Hyon, and I myself knew.
“Oh! How do you know about that?”
“Surely you can guess how close I have become with your
family members, can’t you?” Ri Kwang pretended to be elated at
181
seeing me so surprised.
At the age of six or seven, during the childhood days I spent at
Mangyongdae, I began catching crabs. My grandfather used to
catch a lot of crabs to eke out a poor living. The Sunhwa River, a
tributary of the Taedong River, was teeming with crabs, and
whenever he went catching crabs, grandfather always took me
with him. Perhaps he wanted to teach me the skills needed to eke
out a living from childhood. Although they were despised by rich
people, to us these crabs were delicious when they were salted.
Crab catching was a quite simple and monotonous task. You
just needed to lower well-boiled ears of sorghum into the water
and then pull them out some time later; we found clusters of crabs
clinging to the ears. We used to catch scores or hundreds of them a
day, and no words could tell how happy we were as we returned
home carrying the catch in mesh bags.
The crabs improved our meals a lot. Whenever we had a guest,
my grandmother would take salted crabs out of a jar to serve the
visitor. On such occasions I used to think how good it would be if
we could serve them to my mother’s parents. For me my mother’s
maiden home in Chilgol was a mysterious world, a focus of
infinite love and sympathy. I liked the homely smell of the boiled
cattle fodder steaming in the stable, and I loved to hear the
twittering of the birds on the branches of the jujube trees in the
garden. I also was fascinated by the old tales that were told on the
straw mats, as I sniffed at the scented smoke of the moxa, burning
to keep away mosquitoes on summer nights.
182
My mother’s sister would tell me not to forget Chilgol because I
was born there. Perhaps my mother spent some time at her maiden
home before she gave birth to me. But my grandparents always
said that my birthplace was Namri. They said that my mother
stayed for several days at her parents’ home at about the time I was
born, but that was no reason for me to be known as a boy from
Chilgol. A woman might give birth to a baby away from home,
they said, but according to ancestral law the home of the child’s
father should be considered to be its birthplace.
In any case, I liked my mother’s maiden home as much as my
father’s home, and I felt this very strongly when I was catching
crabs.
When I was studying at the Changdok School at Chilgol, I
would return to Mangyongdae on Sundays to go crab catching
with my grandfather. One day I hid half of the catch in a nearby
bush before I showed the mesh bag to grandfather. He was
saddened by the small catch, but I pretended not to hear his
expressions of regret.
Of course, I should have told him the truth, that I had put aside
half the catch for my mother’s side of the family. But I was not
sure whether he would like it or not, so I hesitated. After I took the
mesh bag home for him, I went to the Sunhwa River again and
took the other half of the catch to Chilgol. My maternal relations
were glad to see the crabs, and thanked me for the present. I told
them that thanks were due to grandpa Po Hyon, who had caught
the crabs.
183
One day my maternal grandfather came to Mangyongdae and
thanked grandpa Po Hyon for the crabs, which he said were
delicious.
At first grandpa Po Hyon was embarrassed by the unexpected
thanks, but when he heard the whole truth he was pleased.
Later he praised me for being a very considerate boy.
This was the incident mentioned by Ri Kwang, an anecdote of
poverty and a drama of kindness.
However, Ri Kwang seemed to have interpreted this story in a
different light, not as an act of kindness.
“After I heard the stories of the marriage and the crabs, I began
to feel sympathy for your family,” Ri Kwang said.
I was deeply moved by his consideration.
“Ri Kwang, how do you like the job of sub-county head?”
I had wanted to know this ever since I had come to central
Manchuria. A report from the political workers in the Jiandao area,
whom I had sent to east Manchuria, said that Ri Kwang, in whom I
was most interested, had been working as a sub-county head in
Wangqing.
He smiled at my question.
“It is irksome, but I’ve done quite well at it. Last autumn some
of our comrades were held in custody at Hamatang by the defence
corps, but they were released when I gave them a reference. The
authority of a sub-county head seems to have been effective.”
He said jokingly that if he were allowed, he would like to be a
sub-county head all his life.
184
I talked proudly about my home village, and Ri Kwang joked.
“If Mangyongdae is such a beautiful place, I will follow you
there with my family after the country becomes independent.”
“Not to Jongsong? I heard that you come from Jongsong.”
“I can make myself at home anywhere so long as I feel attached
to a place, even though I was not born there. Anyway, if I do go
there, please help me to find a place where I can teach primary
schoolchildren. You’ll be a schoolmaster and I will work under
you as a teacher.”
“Oh, my! I hate teaching at primary school....”
“Oh, really! I heard that you taught at Antu or Guyushu. And
your father was a teacher for many years, I heard.”
Our friendship grew deeper when we were organizing the
special detachment.
Immediately after he organized a special detachment at
Wangqing on our advice, Ri Kwang came to Xiaoshahe to see me.
The hostile activities of the national salvation army against Korean
communists and young patriots were a great obstacle to the efforts
of our comrades in Wangqing to prepare for the founding of the
Anti-Japanese People’s Guerrilla Army. Even after he had
organized a special detachment, Ri Kwang was still left in
suspense, unable to decide the future direction of his activities.
At that time I told him about my views on matters of principle
and the means of forming a united front with the Chinese
nationalist anti-Japanese units, and I discussed about the goals and
methods of the special detachment’s activities with him in detail.
185
He accepted my proposals with an open mind.
Foxtail millet mixed with sorghum, bean paste soup, and dry
wild vegetables were the only food that my mother could afford at
that period, but she still accorded him cordial hospitality. And he
respected my mother greatly, too. Mother’s warm love moved him
and his youthful enthusiasm and his simple and honest mind were
a comfort to my mother.
It was while Ri Kwang was staying at Xinglongcun that we
founded the Anti-Japanese People’s Guerrilla Army. Though she
was ill, my mother came with Chol Ju to see the guerrilla army.
Stroking the rifle which Ri Kwang was shouldering, she said;
“With these weapons you can fight in real earnest now. How can
the Independence Army fight the Japanese with outmoded
weapons? Now as I see your army and the weapons on your
shoulders, I feel as if my life-long grievances had been resolved.
How glad your mothers would be to see you as you are now!
Mothers’ hearts are broken and they weep if their sons act like
fools or behave badly, but they would be delighted and moved to
tears if they could see their sturdy sons under arms ready to fight
for their country.”
Back at Wangqing, Ri Kwang worked hard with the national
salvation army.
Our success in achieving cooperation with Commander Yu at
Antu provided valuable experience in work with the Chinese
nationalist anti-Japanese units. At first this work went
comparatively smoothly and successfully.
186
Many of these anti-Japanese units were enthusiastic about
forming an anti-imperialist united front with us.
We communists took the initiative in forming the united front.
However, the Leftist elements obstructed this work. Their
adventurist motto “Down with the upper stratum and win over the
rank and file!” was a provocation to the higher echelons of the
anti-Japanese units, leading to bitter resistance and resentment, and
many of the commanders of these units began to take measures
against the communists, repressing or even killing them.
It was something to be wholeheartedly welcomed in this
situation that Ri Kwang started working among the anti-Japanese
units.
In order to work with these units, Ri Kwang moved from
Beihamatang to Taipinggou.
In those days I often visited his house at Taipinggou. The
village of Taipingcun, with about three hundred peasant
households, was located at the geographical centre of a delta
connecting Xiaowangqing, Yaoyinggou, and Laoheishan. It was
not far from the Soviet-Manchurian border. From this village it
was about six miles to Luozigou. All of the major assembly areas
of the national salvation army units were located near Taipinggou.
Ri Kwang’s special detachment was at Jianchanggou, a little more
than one mile from the town of Luozigou.
His house was perched on the sloping river-bank, isolated from
the village of Taipinggou. There was an imposing well with a large
water dipper by the house, which was known as the house with a
187
dipper. I drank from this well on several occasions. When we
appeared in front of the house on hot summer days, streaming with
sweat, Ri Kwang used to fetch a bucketful of cool water from the
well and offer the water to me. The water was most refreshing.
Whenever I went to Luozigou, I used to drop in at Taipinggou
to inquire after his parents. At this house, together with Chinese
communists such as Zhou Bao-zhong, Chen Han-zhang, Hu Jinmin and Wang Run-cheng, we held the last meeting of the antiJapanese soldiers’ committee which discussed the question of a
united front with the national salvation army.
In the battle in defence of Xiaowangqing and many other large
and small battles, Ri Kwang demonstrated distinct ability and
capacity as a commander. The practical example he set influenced
the soldiers of the national salvation army, and he became
renowned as a military and political worker among the broad
masses of east Manchuria.
Wu Yi-cheng, who regarded Ri Kwang’s special detachment as
a genuinely anti-Manchukuo and anti-Japanese armed force,
appointed him commanding officer of the security squad under the
forward headquarters of the national salvation army, and even
gave him bodyguards.
After that Ri Kwang established contact with Tong Shan-hao in
order to develop further cooperation with the national salvation
army against the Japanese.
Though he had taken up arms to fight the Japanese, Tong Shanhao had degenerated into a bandit. In those days, many people
188
identified the bandits with the mounted rebels as, indeed, they still
do.
There had been many mounted rebels in Manchuria. When a
large number of people of the Han nationality flowed into
Manchuria through Shanhaiguan from China proper in the closing
years of the Qing dynasty, the Manchurian people began arming in
self-defence to protect their farmland and their ancestral heritage
from the plundering immigrants. This was the origin of
Manchuria’s righteous rebels, whom the Japanese called mounted
rebels.
Unlike the scattered bands of sordid highwaymen, the mounted
rebels regarded themselves as just soldiers, acting in accordance
with their own code of conduct and refraining from plundering
people’s property. The mounted rebels’ society was an insurgent
society, far removed from the central political authorities.
The life of the mounted rebels was inconceivable without arms.
They had lived by carrying arms for a long time, and such a life
inspired feelings of envy and admiration. The people in Manchuria
would say openly, “Going on the streets is for women and
rebelling against the authorities is for men.”
Naturally, the rebels did not always in fact abide by their own
strict code of conduct. Many mounted rebels degenerated into
bandits in the course of their outlaw existence. There were many
groups of mounted troops, which were difficult to identify as either
righteous rebels or mere bandits. Many bandits behaved as if they
were righteous rebels. Groups of bandits in the guise of righteous
189
rebels accepted political bribes from imperialist aggressors and
warlords, murdering people and committing atrocities beyond all
imagination.
When many commanders of the national salvation army became
indignant and hostile to the communists because the Leftist tactics
of “down with the upper stratum” were applied in work with
Chinese nationalist anti-Japanese units, the strategists of Japanese
imperialism understood this fact very quickly and used it to sow
discord among the anti-Japanese forces. They were skilled in the
notorious method of getting the anti-Japanese forces to fight
among themselves, sniping at and destroying each other.
The Japanese imperialists employed this method when they
urged Tong Shan-hao to massacre all the members of Ri Kwang’s
special detachment.
At first, they tried to get him to surrender. They put up notices
everywhere stating that the person who captured Ri Kwang would
be rewarded with lots of money, and that if Ri Kwang himself
surrendered he would receive an important appointment. In their
judgement, in order to disband Wu Yi-cheng’s army it was
imperative to check the influence of the communists on it, and Ri
Kwang was the man who wielded that influence. Ri Kwang’s
special detachment was regarded as a united-front shock force
operating in the heart of the national salvation army. Thus the
Japanese intelligence service was aware of his true significance
and role.
Tong Shan-hao, the worst of the bandits, was politically an
190
obtuse, brutal and capricious man, and was easily bribed by the
Japanese strategists. Knowing the views Ri Kwang supported, he
baited a trap by proposing negotiations for a joint operation at
Laoheishan, in accordance with a script prepared by the Japanese
imperialists.
Ri Kwang made the mistake of taking the bait. Not knowing
that Tong Shan-hao had become a running dog of Japanese
imperialism, he set out for Laoheishan with more than ten
members of his special detachment, including Wang Cheng-fu, the
chief secretary of the forward headquarters of the national
salvation army. The party organization warned him against the
danger of dealing with a blind and brutal bandit commander. Ri
Kwang, however, insisted on going to negotiate, even at the risk of
his life, saying that if the line of the anti-imperialist united front
was not implemented, it would be impossible for the revolution to
advance any further.
Tong Shan-hao held a banquet for Ri Kwang’s party and then
massacred all of them except one, who narrowly escaped death.
When the bandits fled, they left him at the site of the massacre,
thinking he was dead like the others. When we got there we saved
him. But he, too, died in battle later, in the woods between
Luozigou and Laoheishan.
Ri Kwang was killed at the age of twenty-eight in a mountain
hut near Laoheishan. His error was lack of vigilance. In order to
form a united front with Tong Shan-hao, he needed to transform
him ideologically. But he tried to effect a united front merely by
191
making friends with him.
I grieved over his death.
I was on fire with the desire to take immediate revenge on the
Tong Shan-hao clique. Had it not been for the voice of reason
which told me that organizing a common front with the Chinese
nationalist anti-Japanese units was the duty of the communists at
that time, their primary task and general strategy, I would have
given way to the impulse and plunged into a bloody battle of
vengeance.
The whole of east Manchuria condemned the nefarious crime
committed by Tong Shan-hao, and cried out for justice to be done.
Leftist hooligans complained that the army did not retaliate against
the class enemy who had murdered Ri Kwang. Some people
claimed that it was a Rightist deviation not to strike against Tong
Shan-hao.
Ri Kwang’s death was an irretrievable loss to the communist
effort for an anti-imperialist common front. We lost a precious
comrade worth more than a thousand enemy soldiers. The enemy
had taken away from me yet another prop and mainstay of the
Korean revolution.
I felt as if my own flesh had been torn away. I bit my lips to
suppress my cries, I was obsessed by my thoughts. In the year
since we started the war against Japanese, how many comrades-inarms had already been taken from my side! Why had my friends
departed one after another, never to return, as soon as we became
attached to each other? Was this the work of destiny?
192
As I strode with clenched fists, up and down the bank of the
River Xiaowangqing, where Ri Kwang and I had discussed the
strategy of the great anti-Japanese war, I cursed again and again
the cruel fate that had driven me into this abyss of grief. Then I
came to a decision:
Ri Kwang’s death must not be pointless. If I succeeded in
establishing the united front with the Chinese nationalist antiJapanese units to which he devoted such great efforts and so much
energy, then he too would be delighted, though in his grave.
Ri Kwang’s death drove me to speed up the negotiations with
Wu Yi-cheng. It did not make me flinch from the path to the
united front, but urged me on along it.
I had to visit Wu Yi-cheng! If I could succeed in negotiations
with him, I would be able to avenge Ri Kwang’s death.
With this in mind, I speeded up the daylight march to Luozigou.
I dropped in at Taipingcun to console Ri Kwang’s bereaved
family. His wife Kong Suk Ja spread her arms wide to stop me.
“General, you must not go there. It is not the place you should
go to. My husband went there and.... General, please don’t go there
for God’s sake.”
But strangely enough, her tearful warning only urged me on to
complete the daylight march.
The woman’s shoulders heaved up and down as she held a
seven-.or eight-year old boy in her arms, and wiped the tears from
her eyes.
The boy in her arms was Ri Po Chon, Ri Kwang’s own son. The
193
boy also stared at me with his eyes brimming over with tears.
Whenever I went there, Ri Po Chon, who would be playing on the
porch, used to call out to me “Uncle Song Ju!” and come out of the
gate. One day he pestered me with a request to make a grasshopper
for him.
When I saw Po Chon run out to the road led by her mother, I
regretted that I had not done this for him. How good it would have
been now if he had clung to me, asking for the grasshopper as he
had before!
How much happier I would feel even if the boy had not dared to
ask, but simply climbed up on my shoulders like the innocent child
of former days, who used to call me “Uncle” and beg me to let him
ride on my shoulders!
But Po Chon was weeping silent bitter tears. Ri Po Chon at my
side was not a friendly, cheerful and mischievous boy, but a
downcast and fearful child suffering great distress, a person who
had bid farewell to his boyhood and its rainbow illusions. His
father’s death had destroyed the boy’s world of playful fancy in
which his greatest desire was for a grasshopper. In this way, Po
Chon lost both his parents before he was ten years old.
Po Chon would never again ask me for the grasshopper. His
tender soul was grieving over the tragic death of his father.
I gazed into his face helplessly.
The words were on the tip of my tongue: “Po Chon, good-bye! I
will return soon when I take vengeance for your father on his
enemy.”
194
Instead, I said, “Po Chon, I’m thirsty. Whenever I came here
your father used to bring me a bowl of cold water, but today you
can do it for your father, can’t you?”
At that moment, his dreamy eyes suddenly became animated
and he darted off like the wind, reappearing just as swiftly with a
brass bowlful of water from the well with the large dipper. This
small event seemed to transform his mental state.
The rippling water in the brass bowl revived Ri Kwang’s image
in my mind. The intermingled images of the boy and his father
reflected on the surface of the water moved me to tears.
Mentally thanking the boy I gulped the water until the bowl was
dry.
Po Chon wiped his nose and glanced at me lovingly as he held
the bowl in his hand.
I felt a little light-hearted as I ordered my men to resume the
march. Just as I was about to take my leave, Po Chon darted
towards his house.
I wondered where he was going.
He ran back quickly, and held out a handful of oats to my white
horse. This silent gesture released the tears that I had been holding
back.
Po Chon stood there on the riverside as we crossed the river and
moved far away. When I turned my head as I sat on the saddle all I
could see was a flickering white dot.
“Po Chon, you must grow up to be a revolutionary like your
father!”
195
I held my hand up in salute from afar, wishing him a bright
future. Later, when the guerrilla zones were dissolved and the
second expedition to north Manchuria was begun, I stayed at Ri
Kwang’s house for about one week and discussed Po Chon’s
future with Kong Suk Ja.
Po Chon grew up into a revolutionary as I had wished. When he
was working at Linkou as a railway worker, he attacked a Japanese
military train, but he was captured and served a two-year prison
sentence. This was all before he was twenty years old.
With the liberation of the country in 1945 he was released and
travelled to the land of his forefathers via Dandong in the autumn
of the same year, craving to see his native land and sky and water.
He travelled as far as Pyongyang and Seoul, and then returned to
Linkou. That journey left vivid impressions on the mind of Ri Po
Chon, a sensitive twenty-year old with a bright future.
Feeling an irresistible desire to devote himself heart and soul to
the construction of the country of his father’s friends, he crossed
the railway bridge over the Amnok River with reluctance. In the
motherland there was the new world of which his father had
dreamed, the promised land which he himself had longed for since
his boyhood.
But this promised land was engulfed in the flames of war five
years later, as the young Republic fought a decisive battle for
survival.
At the news of the war that was raging far away, Ri Po Chon,
now a company commander of the Chinese People’s Liberation
196
Army, volunteered for action and joined the Korean People’s
Army on the Korean front. To our great sorrow he fell in battle in
the autumn of 1950 while fighting as a commanding officer in a
mechanized army division.
Later, in the 1970s, Kim Jong Il, Secretary in Charge of
Organizational Affairs, who took a particular interest in Ri
Kwang’s fiery career and his revolutionary activity, instructed film
workers to produce a film entitled In the First Armed Unit, based
on Ri Kwang’s life. Since then Ri Kwang’s name has been known
to the entire country.
Kong Suk Ja, Ri Kwang’s wife, died while fighting as a
member of the sewing unit in the guerrilla army.
Ri Ju Phyong, Ri Kwang’s father, who worked in support of the
revolutionary army with an enthusiasm fuelled by grief over the
death of his son, and Ri Pong Ju, Ri Kwang’s elder sister, died of
illness induced by enemy torture.
We must be grateful that Ri Po Chon left his son with us before
his death. The son is advancing stoutly along the path that was
pioneered by his grandfather’s generation and transformed into a
broad highway by his father’s generation.
Ri Kwang’s family has thus been serving in the revolutionary
army for three generations. For a family to have fought under arms
for three generations is just cause for noble pride. We must admire
Ri Kwang’s grandson for choosing to wear military uniform as
heir to his grandfather and father, instead of working in other
fields.
197
When this young officer, whose face, bearing and gait so
resembled his grandfather’s, first appeared before my eyes,
together with his mother, I felt a lump rise in my throat, for it
seemed as though Ri Kwang, who left our side 60 years ago had
returned to visit me.
Ri Po Chon’s wife, who lost her husband at the age of 25, has
brought up her son, trusting for more than 40 years that he would
be a stalwart heir to Ri Kwang’s cause and his revolutionary spirit.
Her devotion merits everyone’s highest commendation.
At his meeting with me Ri Po Chon’s son said that he was
resolved to dedicate himself and his son and daughters to me and
Marshal Kim Jong Il, that they would serve with loyal devotion in
military uniform. I know very well that this will not prove to be
empty words. Ri Kwang’s family does not use words idly.
What great work Ri Kwang would have done if he had returned
alive to the liberated motherland!
Even now I occasionally ponder on this. Ri Kwang’s social
activity began, of course, with teaching and at Ri Chong San’s
house, at the time of the Mingyuegou meeting that winter, he also
expressed an ambition to become a teacher.
But I think that if he had survived, to return to the liberated
homeland in triumph, he would have become a soldier like Kang
Kon and Choe Hyon. He was a devoted communist who always
chose a difficult job.
198
2. Negotiations with Wu Yi-cheng
One of the most serious and pressing problems we faced in our
activities after we moved to Wangqing was sharp confrontation
with the Chinese nationalist anti-Japanese armed forces. In the
year 1933, the Japanese imperialists’ persistent machinations,
intended to sow dissent, the frequent vacillations on the part of the
leaders of the Chinese nationalist armed forces, and the harmful
effects of the Leftist Soviet line, brought the relations between the
Anti-Japanese People’s Guerrilla Army and the national salvation
army again to the brink of armed conflict.
I have mentioned before that the communists of Korea and
China invested great efforts in the work with the Chinese
nationalist units in Manchuria after the September 18 incident.
Thanks to these efforts the Wangqing guerrilla unit was able to
maintain intimate relations with those Chinese nationalist units in
the early days. To cite an admirable example, on one side, two
armed units–the AJPGA and the self-defence corps–and, on the
other side, Commander Guan’s battalion concerted their efforts to
repulse an attack by Japanese garrison troops at Tokgol in the
199
spring of 1932.
At that time the Japanese garrison troops in Daduchuan had
moved scores of carts towards Tokgol in order to transport timber
that had been cut during the reign of the Kuomintang. There were
large stockpiles of timber in the valleys of Dawangqing and
Xiaowangqing. That day our forces lured the enemy into an
ambush, killing most of the force of 40 to 50 garrison troops and
capturing many weapons.
The battle at Tokgol marked a turning-point in the work to
improve the image of the communists in Wangqing, where anticommunist feelings were deep-rooted, and in the development of
relations with the NSA from hostility to cooperation. The battle
paved the way for the Korean communists to infiltrate into the
NSA. After the battle Kim Un Sik, Hong Hae Il, Won Hong
Gwon, Jang Ryong Sam, Kim Ha Il and others joined Guan’s unit.
Kim Ha Il, a crackshot, was appointed communications officer
and Kim Un Sik, a man of knowledge, was appointed chief of staff
soon after that.
As they had done in the past the people of Macun washed the
clothes of the men and officers of Guan’s unit after the battle, and
sent them toothbrushes, tooth powder, soap, towels and tobacco
pouches as gifts; moreover, they frequently organized artistic
performances by Children’s Corps members. The Young
Communist League members conducted political work among
them with propaganda leaflets.
In general, the NSA soldiers seldom called the communists
200
“tongzhi ” (comrade); however, the officers and men of Guan’s
unit always called our guerrillas “tongzhi ” whenever they met
them.
The guerrillas who joined Guan’s unit were all qualified at least
for district party committee members, so they were efficient in
working among the officers and men of the NSA unit. Battalion
Commander Guan was charmed by the communists’ personalities
and qualifications. Winning him over was an event of great
significance for the improvement of relations with the other units
of the NSA.
The anti-Japanese guerrilla unit in the Hunchun area exchanged
information with the NSA units, and they cooperated even in the
struggle against the enemy’s lackeys. The guerrillas in Yantonglazi
armed themselves with weapons provided by a NSA unit.
The prevailing situation favoured the communists: this turningpoint meant that they could establish a united front with the NSA
if they worked harder.
However, the “Kim Myong San incident” provoked by the
Leftist adventurists had nullified the friendly relations with
Chinese nationalist units which had been established with so much
effort. This incident resulted in Battalion Commander Guan’s
surrender to the Japanese imperialists and in other NSA units
breaking with the communists. At about the same time the
guerrilla unit led by Choe Hyon opened fire with a machinegun on
the soldiers of a Chinese nationalist unit in Yanji County as they
defected to the enemy; this incident further complicated relations
201
with the NSA.
In its early days the Wangqing guerrilla unit made quite a few
mistakes in its relations with the NSA. Swayed by his desire to
obtain a few rifles, Ryang Song Ryong, who was in charge of the
battalion, did not implement the line of the united front to the
letter. He had a fine personality and was a competent officer who
commanded skilfully in battle, but his ingrained military routinism
and adventurism led him to slight the united front. We criticized
him severely for this.
Only Kaoshan unit, which had been under our constant
influence, did not follow the example of Battalion Commander
Guan; this unit maintained a lasting alliance with our anti-Japanese
guerrilla army. On the Tano day or the fifth day of the fifth lunar
month of 1933 the unit, in cooperation with the self-defence corps
in Jattogi (the present Taipingcun) which was led by Pak Tu Song,
repelled an attack of the 300-strong Japanese garrison troops and
the puppet Manchukuo army, when they invaded Shiliping via
Dongnancha from their base in the Dongning county town. Many
of the invading troops were killed.
The NSA units neglected long-range observation, posting
sentries only directly in front of their headquarters; so the AntiJapanese Self-Defence Corps maintained long-range observation
posts for Kaoshan unit. When he had to send important, urgent
messages to other Chinese units, Kaoshan would often ask the
paramilitary organizations in Shiliping for help. The members of
the Children’s Vanguard were extremely responsible in the way
202
they transmitted these messages for him.
However, this friendly relationship did not extend to other units,
and the reckless Leftist tendency prevalent in the guerrilla zone
threatened it in this case.
The Leftist Soviet policy helped to accelerate the corruption and
degeneration of the Chinese nationalist anti-Japanese units which
only recently had been our allies or sympathizers.
The Leftist opportunists conducted their work with the Chinese
units in an ultra-Leftist fashion. They indiscriminately promoted
such slogans as “Down with the officers from the landlord and
propertied class!” and “Soldiers should mutiny and come over to
the guerrilla army!” claiming that we should “establish a united
front only with the rank and file” and “make the soldiers of the
NSA kill their commanders and rise in revolt.” The only result
they produced was the harmful one of destroying our unity with
the upper echelons of the Chinese units.
The Chinese nationalist units killed Korean people, saying that
they were “Japanese puppets” and “laogaoli gongchandang ”
(“Korean communists”–Tr.).
The Japanese imperialists took advantage of this situation to
launch an all-out offensive to drive wedges between the Korean
and Chinese peoples, between the Korean and Chinese
communists and between our Anti-Japanese People’s Guerrilla
Army and the Chinese nationalist army. From the first day of their
occupation of Manchuria, they made desperate efforts to gain
control over the NSA units which had broken with Zhang Xue-
203
liang’s former Northeast Army and fought under the anti-Japanese
banner. What they feared most here was the alignment of our
guerrilla army and the NSA. They were well aware that such an
alignment of communists and NSA units would produce a
formidable force that would undermine Japanese imperialist rule
and be a stumbling block in their path of aggression across the
continent.
Japan’s skill in sowing dissension was clearly revealed in the
Wanbaoshan incident, the Longjing incident (an abortive scheme),
and the Fushun incident. The Japanese strategic intelligence
service, which was skilled in underhand subterfuge, did not
hesitate to invent such a murderous drama as the Fushun incident,
at which even a beast or a stone Buddha might feel shame, in order
to weaken the good-neighbourly relations between the Korean and
Chinese peoples. The Fushun incident involved the murder of an
innocent Chinese in Fushun by a Japanese who was ordered to stab
him with a dagger provided by the Japanese intelligence service.
The murder was committed but the scheme failed to create bad
blood between the Korean and Chinese peoples even though the
plotters had disguised the murderer in a Korean overcoat to
reinforce the rumour that it was a Korean who had murdered the
Chinese and escaped. He was identified as a Japanese when his
Japanese clothes were spotted under the Korean coat.
A number of such incidents culminated in the Liutiaogou
incident and the Lugou Bridge incident. The method Japan applied
every time she hatched a plot was equally primitive and brutal.
204
However, many people were easily deceived by these put-up jobs,
even though they themselves often suffered because of the
Japanese imperialists’ dastardly methods in cooking up their
shams.
While spreading rumours, such as “The Korean people will lay
claim to Manchuria,” and “The communists are going to disarm
the NSA,” the Japanese imperialists gave the reactionaries
belonging to the “Minsaengdan” a reason to clamour for Korean
autonomy in Jiandao, that is, for the establishment of a “Korean
autonomous region in Jiandao” and a “Korean legal autonomous
government,” so playing the Korean people off against the Chinese
people. At other times they would set fire to Chinese houses and
spread the lie that the Korean guerrillas had done it.
Another reason for the collapse of the united front was that the
Japanese imperialists laid schemes for the surrender of the leaders
of the Chinese anti-Japanese units, which resulted in the
degeneration of the latter’s anti-Japanese consciousness.
In January 1933, Wang Yu-zhen, who was in Tumenzi,
Hunchun County, surrendered to the enemy with his soldiers.
Hundreds of them were restructured into a special guerrilla unit
fighting against us. In February, half of the soldiers of Guan’s unit
in Xiaowangqing capitulated and joined the defence corps and the
public security bureau of Manchukuo; in the same month scores of
the officers and men of the Ma Gui-lin’s unit which was appearing
frequently in the vicinity of Dahuanggou, capitulated and joined
the self-defence corps in Hamatang. The officers and soldiers of
205
the Jiang Hai’s unit in Erchazigou, Wangqing County, and of the
Qingshan unit in Huoshaopu offered to surrender.
The Japanese imperialists bribed the notorious bandit leader
Tong Shan-hao, who was holding the Luozigou area, and
instigated him to murder all the guerrillas of Ri Kwang’s special
detachment.
The situation was so bad that the guerrilla army, afraid of the
NSA’s violence, had to march by night. The Koreans would not be
able to keep their heads above ground unless relations with the
NSA were improved. Reversing the hostile relations with the NSA
and developing an alliance with them was once again a vital task
for the Korean communists if they were to continue the revolution.
I made a firm decision to pay a visit to Wu Yi-cheng, the
forward area commander of the NSA. Since Wang De-lin left
Jiandao, Wu Yi-cheng held the real power in the NSA. I felt
confident that if I prevailed upon him, I would be able to put a stop
to the difficulties created for guerrilla activities in east Manchuria
as a result of the “Kim Myong San incident” and the massacre of
Ri Kwang’s special detachment, and at the same time I could
possibly break the deadlock in which our revolution found itself.
I had a serious discussion with Pan, the provincial party
committee member, about negotiations with Wu. Pan
acknowledged that my decision was reasonable, but he advised me
not to go to Wu in person. He was of the opinion that it would be
difficult for a Korean, rather than a Chinese, to persuade him, for
he was too self-important and too prejudiced. He added that in
206
order to win over Commanders Wu and Chai we would have to
prevent Ri Chong Chon, the latter’s adviser, from interfering in the
negotiations, and that this was a problem.
I insisted on going to negotiate in spite of all the difficulties Pan
had pointed out.
I said, “Ri is a Korean; even though he is anti-communist, he
will not place obstacles in our way if we argue persuasively. He is
an old acquaintance of mine. I spoke with him several times during
the meeting on the merging of the three nationalist organizations in
Jilin. My father was also close friends with him.”
Pan tried his best to prevent my making an adventure, saying:
“What difference does it make now whether someone is an
acquaintance or a stranger? Do you think they will treat
acquaintances differently from strangers? Worse still, they say Wu
is a die-hard. The odds are against us.”
“I once managed to win over Commander Yu in Antu. So why
not Wu Yi-cheng?”
“When you were negotiating with Yu, Mr. Liu Ben-cao was his
chief of staff. That gave you a good start.”
“I could have a good start in Wu’s unit, too. Chen Han-zhang is
working as chief secretary in the unit. The chief of staff, Hu Jinmin, is one of our operatives, too.”
This remark threw myself into consternation. Only a few days
before I had received a letter from Chen, whose role as a powerful
support I always emphasized, requesting me to take decisive
measures to assist him. On the grounds that it was almost
207
impossible to effect an alliance with Commander Wu through his own
efforts, he wrote that he “would like measures to be taken by the
organization as soon as possible, for only Comrade Kim Il Sung will
be able to find a solution to this problem.” Pan, too, knew about
this.
“The revolution has a long way to go, and you should not
engage in such an adventure. Please think about it carefully, for
mercy’s sake,” Pan implored. “You must not regard yourself as
your own property. One slip and you could become another Ri
Kwang. Don’t forget that. Even if we all die, you must survive and
fight to the last for Korea on behalf of all of us.”
Pan’s remark moved me, but I could not abandon my
commitment to an allied front.
After Pan had left for Hunchun County delegates from guerrilla
units in every county of east Manchuria gathered in Wangqing and
held a meeting to discuss the question of a united front. The main
agenda item was the formation of an alliance with the NSA, in
other words, who should go to lead negotiations at Luozigou,
where the NSA units led by Wu Yi-cheng, Chai Shi-rong, Shi
Zhong-heng and others, were concentrated.
I insisted that I should go. The meeting decided that my journey
to Luozigou would be possible only with an escort of 100
guerrillas, and granted permission. The journey to Wu Yi-cheng
was no simple one as we have already seen.
In order to negotiate with Wu, I had to find out about the
situation there through such people as Chen Han-zhang and Hu
208
Jin-min. However, Chen was Wu’s chief secretary and a serious
man; he would not play games, shut away in his office. And if he
showed himself outside, he could be misunderstood if he made a
contact with Koreans. Nevertheless, he was sure to help me in my
work no matter what the risk because in former days he had been a
member of the Young Communist League organization in which I
had had a part, and we had pledged loyalty to one another at that
time.
After writing to Chen and Hu, I sent letters to Wu Yi-cheng and
Chai Shi-rong, explaining the purpose of our journey to Luozigou.
To make the letters more formal, we stamped a large, square seal
beside the name of the sender.
After dispatching the letters we inquired into the reaction in
Wu’s unit through the revolutionary organizations in Luozigou,
and the reports were good. The underground organizations even
informed us of the fact that the NSA had set up a placard with the
words “Welcome to the Korean Anti-Japanese Guerrilla Army!” at
the entrance to the town.
I left for Luozigou with 100 selected men. As they marched
along in new uniform, and with new rifles and leather kit-bags
over their shoulders, they were a spectacular sight.
I rode on a white horse at the head of the column.
On arrival at Taipinggou we issued a statement on the AJPGA’s
entry into Luozigou and dispatched an orderly to Wu’s unit; then
we settled in for the night, waiting for a reply.
The following day we received notice from Luozigou that they
209
had agreed to the proposed negotiations. Chen Han-zhang’s
assurances had proved effective in persuading Wu to accept our
proposal. When he received my letter he recommended
Commander Kim to Wu as someone he knew well, and said I was
a very good-natured man.
As he listened to his recommendation Wu asked him, “He is a
communist, how is it that you know him so well? Are you then a
communist, too?”
Chen replied that Commander Kim was his schoolmate and an
old acquaintance.
“If he is your schoolmate and a good fellow, then I will talk to
him over luncheon.”
We posted a company from Hunchun in the lower village of
Taipinggou so that they could support us in case the NSA should
detain us or do us harm; then our remaining 50 men entered the
town of Luozigou in an imposing array, flying a red flag and
sounding a trumpet.
Chen Han-zhang, who came to greet the guerrilla army, guided
me to the headquarters of the NSA. Jo Tong Uk and Ri Song Rim,
my orderly, who were to assist me during the negotiations,
followed Chen, with wooden-cased Mausers at their sides. There
were several aides of Kuomintang origin in the headquarters.
Wu Yi-cheng was a man of fine presence with a long beard. I
had heard a rumour that he was so arrogant he would not stand up
even when a visitor called and would talk to him, sprawling on a
tigerskin and drinking tea; but on that day he greeted me with all
210
due formality. However, he did not maintain the Chinese custom
of offering his guest tea.
At first I greeted him in a humble manner, saying, “We highly
appreciate the patriotism of your unit’s joining the anti-Japanese
struggle when many units from Zhang Xue-liang’s former
Northeast Army were surrendering to the Japanese army.”
My greeting brought a smile to the corners of his lips and he
ordered his aide to bring tea.
“I have heard reports that you, Commander Kim, are fighting
well against the Japanese. Your army is not great in numbers but
you know how to fight; we are not like you, even though we have
many soldiers. My men say the soldiers you brought with you have
brand-new rifles; will you not exchange some of them for our old
ones?”
The negotiations thus began with his words of greeting, which
were somewhat perplexing. Facing Commander Wu as he tried to
fathom the other party’s thoughts by praising him on and at the
same time requesting something difficult to comply with, I judged
that he was a competent diplomat and shrewd man who had known
both sweetness and bitterness in his life. I did not think that a
forward area commander, the leader of thousands of soldiers,
would make such a request at the first meeting without
forethought, simply out of greed for a few new rifles.
“You say exchange? We can give them free.”
I satisfied his request without any fuss and added in a casual
manner, “Is there any need to deal in such petty matters? We’ll
211
have plenty of them if we fight a battle with the Japanese. But
since you request it, we will give them as a gift.”
Wu stroked his beard down and then approached me from a
different angle, “Well, what is your communist party? That man,
Chen Han-zhang, says the communist party is not bad, but I can’t
believe him. Zhou Bao-zhong is also a communist and when he
was my adviser, I found him not to my liking, always wasting time
for some reason, I don’t know why. So I got rid of him. By the
way, I heard that you communists destroy the mountain shrines
when you pass by them.”
“Why should we destroy the shrines? It is a lie told by wicked
people to discredit the communists.”
“Then, do you, Commander Kim, pay tribute at the shrines?”
“I neither destroy them nor pay tribute to them, for it is nothing
to do with me. What about you, Commander Wu?”
“Neither do I.”
“Then both of us are the same in that neither pays tribute.”
Dumbfounded, he stroked his beard once again with a smile on
his face.
“That’s right. By the way, they say that communists, men and
women alike, all sleep under one quilt and they plunder the people
of their property. Is this true?”
I realized that the success of the negotiations depended on how
I could manage this question and that I must give him an
appropriate answer which would give him a correct understanding
of communists.
212
“That is another fabrication of the bad elements. It is true that
some alleged communists have deprived landowners of their lands,
regardless of whether they are pro-Japanese or anti-Japanese, but
we don’t regard it as a good thing. However, the landlords should
have had the generosity to give the sharecroppers who were dying
from hunger, some grain. Can it be right that they regard them
with indifference while they feather their own nests? Why should
the poor peasants revolt if they are given food grain? Hungry
people have no way to survive but by fighting. I may be wrong but
I believe the Taiping Rebellion took place in China in the last
century for the same reason.”
Wu Yi-cheng nodded his head.
“That seems right. Those who wish to eat their fill and live
comfortably by themselves are evil-doers in this chaotic situation.”
Grasping my opportunity, I continued:
“That men and women sleep under one quilt is a lie the
Japanese invented to insult the communists. There are many
woman soldiers in our guerrilla unit, but such a thing never occurs.
If they fall in love, they get married. Our discipline between men
and women is very strict.”
“That’s what I mean. It must never happen that several men
sleep with one woman in turn.”
“Of course not. There are no men in the world more decentminded than us communists.”
When our conversation reached this point, Wu began calling me
“Commander Kim” and stopped using awkward words.
213
“Ha, ha! Commander Kim is trying to make a communist of
me.”
“I have no thought of making you a communist, Commander
Wu. A man cannot be made a communist by someone else.
However, I think it advisable to unite our efforts to defeat the
Japanese imperialists.”
Wu Yi-cheng gestured nervously with his arm.
“We don’t collaborate with the communists, even if it means
fighting on our own.”
“Surely it is good to fight the Japanese in cooperation when we
are not strong enough alone?”
“I still don’t need favours from the communists.”
“No one can predict his future. Some day you may ask a favour
from us.”
“Well, that may well be possible. God only knows what awaits
a man. By the way, may I ask a favour of you? Won’t you join
jiajiali ? It is better than the communist party, I think,” he said
casually.
Seeing me hesitate, he looked at me in amusement.
I was perplexed to hear the word jiajiali in that context.
Commander Wu had puzzled me completely.
Jiajiali is a Chinese word meaning “one family.” It is an
organization of the Chinese people which was also called
Qinghongbang. It was formed as a union against the emperor by
the workers who dug canals and hauled boats, when they could no
longer endure their hardships. There was no private property in
214
this organization, and it was a large one for that time.
When people swear brotherhood, they become elder and
younger brothers, but people joining jiajiali become fathers and
sons. A man who wishes to find a father could join it, but not a
man who wishes to find sons. The higher the caste of the jiajiali
was, the more dignified its members were and the more authority
they possessed. A ceremony was held when a man joined. Kim Jae
Bom (alias Kim Phyong), who had joined a jiajiali of the 24th
generation on our instructions, had said that the ceremony was
spectacular. A new member had to bow hundreds of times to those
who were to become his fathers and seniors.
Now I had received an embarrassing invitation to join such an
organization. If I declined, the negotiations which had gone
smoothly so far might be deadlocked; but if I accepted, he would
take me to a Buddha and make me bow there and then, which
would mean making myself subordinate to Wu Yi-cheng. When
preparing for the negotiations, we had not anticipated this kind of
situation. Anyway, I had to resolve the dilemma.
“It would be a fine thing for you and I to enter a jiajiali, but
before we join another organization we are obliged to obtain
permission from the party organization. If it is not granted, I can
do nothing. Let us leave the matter until I obtain permission from
our organization.”
“Ha, ha! Then, it seems you are a half-baked commander, not a
fully-fledged one.”
Commander Wu looked at me with a slightly dissatisfied
215
expression on his face and all of a sudden asked me, “Do you drink,
Commander Kim?”
“I can drink, but don’t even if I want to, lest it hamper me in
fighting against the Japanese.”
“Your communist party is agreeable to me. I wish to cooperate
with you but I am afraid I would have to imbibe Marxism.
Spreading communism among our people is not good.”
“Don’t worry about it, Commander. We have no intention of
propagating communism. We will only carry out anti-Japanese
propaganda.”
“Your party is very gentlemanly for a communist party. But it
was wrong of the communists in Wangqing to disarm Commander
Guan’s battalion. What is your opinion of that incident?”
“What more is there to say about it? It was the most serious
mistake of all possible mistakes. So we severely reprimanded the
Wangqing special detachment last year.”
“Commander Kim, you are a fair-minded soldier. By the way,
some people say that the communist party is right in everything it
does. How could that be?”
“A communist is also a man. So how could he make no
mistakes? I, too, make mistakes now and then, for I am not a
machine, but a man. When one tries to do a great deal of work, one
is bound to make mistakes sometimes. So we study hard and
improve ourselves so that we shall commit fewer errors.”
“You are right. Lazy men who do nothing will make no
mistakes. The communists do many things and this we appreciate.
216
In general, it is amusing to talk to you, Commander Kim. You are
candid, so we do understand each other.”
Saying this, Wu wound up the negotiations for the moment. He
took me politely by the hand and then released his grip. I was sure
the negotiations were going well. On the spur of the moment he
said good-humouredly that Chen Han-zhang, a friend of
Commander Kim, helped him with his writing and that without
him he was as good as blind.
Wu asked me whether I knew Hu Jin-min. I answered that I did
not know him, for I was afraid the nature of our relations might be
revealed if I answered in the affirmative. He called Hu Jin-min and
politely introduced him to me. Hu and I said, “How do you do?” to
each other as if we were strangers. Chen Han-zhang told me that it
was very rare for Wu to introduce his staff officers to visitors in
this way; he said confidently that I could regard the negotiations as
successful.
That day we agreed with Wu Yi-cheng to establish a standing
body called the Joint Anti-Japanese Army Coordination
Commission which would keep the AJPGA and the NSA in touch
with each other and coordinate their actions. We also discussed the
membership of the commission. Wang Run-cheng, a Chinese, was
appointed a representative of the Chinese units and Jo Tong Uk, a
representative of our unit. We decided to set up the commission’s
office in Luozigou, near Commander Wu’s headquarters.
Wu Yi-cheng invited us to luncheon. Chen Han-zhang informed
me that this also was special treatment.
217
The conversation over luncheon also took place in a friendly
atmosphere. Whenever the Japanese imperialist occupation of
Manchuria came up, Wu would frown indignantly, twitching his
thick eyebrows. He was also indignant at the murder of Ri Kwang
by Tong Shan-hao.
“They are indigenous bandits, not our sort. That Tong Shan-hao
was certain to become a cat’s paw of the Japanese! That his ilk has
harmed your army is a cursed crime. I am ashamed that such a
devil can be one of our Chinese nation.”
This remark gave me a glimpse of another side of his
personality.
I was satisfied with the result of the negotiations and Wu Yicheng’s hospitality. Wu put on airs, and he was tainted with the
ideology of the Kuomintang, but that was not the fundamental
point. What was important was his exceptionally strong antiJapanese spirit and his great commitment to national salvation.
Cooperation would have been inconceivable if only our
distinctions had been asserted, the ideology, class and nationality
which separated us. The goal of an allied front permitted us to
scorn such limitations.
That same day I sent a liaison man to Xiaowangqing with a
letter saying that cooperation with Commander Wu had been
successfully arranged, that the question of Chai Shi-rong was still
outstanding, that we would try to approach him gradually, and that
the unit should make full preparations for action because we
needed to attack a large walled county town like Dongning in
218
order to step up the united front.
After our success in the first contact with Wu Yi-cheng, we
immediately tackled the work of winning over the unit of Chai
Shi-rong, the most obstinate force among the NSA units, to the
anti-Japanese united front. Chen Han-zhang said Commander Wu
seemed to be quite determined, but Commander Chai posed a
problem; he was anxious to find a way of expelling Ri Chong
Chon. Commander Wu had only one brigade. Commander Chai
had a larger force.
I suggested negotiations to Ri Chong Chon, but he declined. On
the contrary, he incited Chai to disarm the communist army. But
Chai, who would normally heed any advice from Ri, objected to
that trick. He said that if he were not careful, he could get into
serious trouble, since Commander Wu Yi-cheng had dined with
Commander Kim and that, moreover, Commander Kim was in
command of the Wangqing unit, which fought bravely. Ri Chong
Chon worked so hard to incite Chai against communism that we
could not even meet him face to face.
The only way of solving the problem was to separate
Commander Chai’s unit from Wu Yi-cheng. The method used to
separate Wu Yi-cheng, who had agreed to cooperate with us, from
Chai Shi-rong was to bring Shi Zhong-heng’s brigade, Wu Yicheng’s main force, under our influence. If we dealt with the
brigade commander properly, we could further consolidate our
initial success in the negotiations with Wu Yi-cheng.
I inquired about the composition of his brigade; most of the
219
soldiers were of lower class origin. Shi Zhong-heng himself had
been a swineherd for a landowner at the age of 9 and then joined
the army to support himself. He had served under Wang De-lin in
the Jilin field army; after the September 18 incident he had entered
the national salvation army and led a platoon, a company and a
regiment, and now he was a brigadier-general. He was a typical
soldier who relished fighting.
I went to see Shi Zhong-heng with a letter of introduction from
Hu Jin-min on the day Hu wrote it. When I requested an interview,
Shi complied without ceremony, setting all his other business
aside. He treated me warmly, like a friend, saying that a visit to his
unit by Commander Kim who fought the Japanese so successfully
was an auspicious occasion. He was neither against communism,
nor was he like a warlord; he was open-hearted and gentle.
Shi said that our unit’s successive victories in the fight with the
Japanese army were a source of pride to the people living in east
Manchuria as well as to the Korean people. At that time we had
already dealt heavy blows against the Japanese imperialists in the
battles at Jiapigou, Liangshuiquanzi and several other places.
Although the media had not reported them, the news of those
battles had been spread widely throughout the Jiandao area. To my
surprise, Shi was well aware of the details of the battles and their
results.
He welcomed my proposal for a joint attack on the Dongning
county town. He said, “I had long wished for a strong neighbour
and friend such as your army, Commander Kim .We are brothers
220
from today. Your enemy is my enemy and your friend is my
friend.”
We embraced each other warmly in celebration of the success
of our negotiations. From that day we were brothers and comradesin-arms who shared the days of fierce battle like brothers. Our
close friendship remained unchanged until he fell in battle as the
commander of the 2nd Independent Division.
The outcome of the negotiations at Luozigou removed the
greatest obstacle in the way of the anti-Japanese revolution. While
cooperation with Commander Yu was the starting-point of the
allied front, the negotiation with Wu Yi-cheng was a historic step
towards extending that initial success gained to the whole area of
east Manchuria; it was a stunning event which put an end to the
meaningless confrontation and bloodshed occurring between the
Korean and Chinese nations since the May 30 Uprising and the
Wanbaoshan incident and merged the fierce anti-Manchukuo and
anti-Japanese tendencies into one raging torrent.
Through the negotiations with Wu Yi-cheng and Shi Zhongheng we realized quite clearly that a united front was possible only
when our own forces were strong. Had we not displayed our
military strength to the full through the campaigns in south and
north Manchuria in 1932 and through the large and small battles in
1933 in and around Wangqing, and had we not developed the
guerrilla army into an indomitable armed force, Wu Yi-cheng
would have turned us away from his door. The alliance with Wu
Yi-cheng was established so smoothly because we were strong,
221
because our politics and morals were superior to those of the NSA,
and because our ardent patriotism, international fraternity and
unshakable faith in the validity of our cause won his sympathy.
Since the day I achieved cooperation with the NSA I have
regarded it as axiomatic that the best resources for an allied front
are one’s own forces and that one cannot fight in cooperation with
any friendly army or country without fostering one’s own strength,
and I have devoted my entire life to consolidating the motive force
of the revolution.
Wu Yi-cheng and Chai Shi-rong also agreed with my idea of
attacking the Dongning county town. We held a joint meeting in
Luozigou with Wu Yi-cheng, Shi Zhong-heng, Chai Shi-rong and
other commanders of the NSA, and mapped out a detailed plan of
operations for the battle; then I wrote to our headquarters in
Wangqing once again.
Thanks to the successful negotiations with Wu Yi-cheng and
victory in the battle at Dongning county town, we became widely
known to the guerrilla units of the Koreans, Chinese NSA units
and other anti-Manchukuo, anti-Japanese forces. Cooperation with
Wu Yi-cheng convinced me more than ever that strengthening the
united front was essential to the survival of the anti-Japanese
revolution as a whole and the key to promoting the revolution.
Even after I had left Jiandao and moved the theatre of
operations to the Changbai area, I looked back with emotion upon
the days when I strove to make the negotiations with Wu a
success. Wu Yi-cheng, now as a member of the Northeast Anti-
222
Japanese Allied Army, was fighting in those days on our flank,
with Fusong and its district as his base. When I heard he was
fighting nearby, I was reminded of our old friendship, sealed in the
days of the common struggle.
With more than 100 guerrillas, I went to the woods east of
Xigang where the secret camps of Wu Yi-cheng’s unit were
located. Wu rushed to the edge of the camp and embraced me. We
hugged each other as warmly as childhood friends separated for
scores of years.
No sooner did I feel Wu’s coarse moustache smelling of
gunsmoke on my chin, than a lump rose in my throat despite
myself. I could not understand why a meeting with this Chinese
man whose character contained so much of the warlord, who was
so very proud, should make me choke. Our friendship sealed in the
days of battle was quite exceptional. I was greatly moved that
Commander Wu treated me quite sincerely like his own brother,
disregarding my nationality and age.
No friendship in the world can be more sincere, more ardent
and more durable than friendship formed under the hail of fire. Is
this not the reason why we call the friendship between the very
closest of friends a militant friendship?
I could find no trace in him of the former haughty pride which
led him to assess people’s ability with his sharp eyes while
lounging over a tigerskin. He looked like an old, generous villager
rather than a hero of the green forest with thousands of soldiers
under his command. He seemed to have lost weight and his eyes
223
seemed less bright.
I stayed for two days in Wu Yi-cheng’s secret camp before
returning. As I was leaving Wu Yi-cheng offered to turn over 100
of his soldiers to me. When I declined, he feigned anger, saying,
“You obviously lack or want nothing. However, Commander Kim,
as a friend I must give you some assistance towards your
preparations for a great campaign. Those 100 men must fight
under your command rather than following me. As the saying
goes–Mugwort grows straight on the hemp plantation.”
I have not met Wu Yi-cheng since then. At the end of the year I
heard that Wu had gone to the Soviet Union after entrusting his
unit to another man; then I lost contact with him and heard no
more of him.
Wu Yi-cheng was not simply a companion of convenience
while we were putting together the allied front; he was an
unforgettable comrade-in-arms who braved the hail of bullets
shoulder to shoulder with us in battle. How Commander Wu spent
the latter part of his life and how he met his fate still remain
unclear. Worst of all, there is nowhere I can turn for reliable
information.
If he remained loyal to the ideal of patriotism until the last
moment of his life, then that is enough to satisfy me.
224
3. The Battle of the Dongning County Town
After the negotiations at Luozigou, the Joint Anti-Japanese
Army Coordination Commission worked hard among the national
salvation army units. Members of the commission even infiltrated
the mountain rebels and made strenuous efforts to draw them into
the anti-Japanese united front.
Early in September 1933, this commission arranged a joint
meeting at which we discussed with Wu Yi-cheng, Shi Zhongheng, Chai Shi-rong, Li San-xia and other leaders of the Chinese
nationalist units at Laomuzhuhe near Luozigou the plan for
attacking the Dongning county town (Sanchakou) and finalized the
plan of operations. On the recommendation of Commander Wu
Yi-cheng the meeting unanimously approved the operation plan as
we had drafted it.
We did not attack the town immediately after the negotiations at
Luozigou; we allowed ourselves more than two months for
preparation, because we attached special importance to this battle.
We regarded this battle as a watershed in making our anti-Japanese
guerrilla army fully legitimate; we also believed that an agreement
on the united front with the NSA units would be brought into
225
effect through victory in this battle. Should we succeed in this
battle the united front with the Chinese nationalist units would be
put on a rock-solid foundation; if not, the positive outcome of the
negotiations at Luozigou would be undermined, and the united
front would collapse while still in the stage of formation. Failure in
the battle would also stain the military prestige of our guerrilla
army which we had built up in the course of bloody battles. It
would also cause serious problems if the NSA complained that
they had been crushed because of the united front.
This was indeed a tough test for us. Our reconnaissance and
information from our local organizations confirmed that a 500-
strong Kwantung Army unit led by Ishida, a puppet Manchukuo
army regiment commanded by Commander Qing, and puppet
Manchukuo police and self-defence corps were posted in the
county town. Worse still, the enemy was entrenched in an
impregnable fortress which was armed with artillery and other
modern weapons.
At that time some leaders of the Chinese units estimated the
chances of occupying the town at only 30 per cent. At the meeting
they even expressed concern that our forces were too small in
comparison to the enemy, saying that internationally recognized
war manuals stated that the forces of the attacker should be three
times greater than those of the defender.
However, Wu Yi-cheng and other people retorted that they had
nothing to learn from such silly prattle, which could only make
sense in the Japanese military academy that Ri Chong Chon had
226
attended. They criticized such a passive attitude to the battle.
As the NSA had already failed once in an attack on the
Dongning county town, it was no accident that some commanders
overestimated the enemy’s strength, fearing the Japanese army
with its boasts of “invincibility.”
Once a plan was adopted at the meeting, the coordination
commission, in collaboration with Hu Jin-min, allocated to each
unit the number of troops which should participate in the battle.
We were to contribute three companies, one from each of
Wangqing, Hunchun and Yanji to the battle, and we summoned
them to Luozigou.
The company I had taken from Wangqing and the company
which Paek Il Phyong, the battalion political commissar, led all the
way from Hunchun, met amidst great emotion near Luozigou at
the end of August 1933.
But to our regret, the comrades from Yanji did not arrive at the
rendezvous, for the message had not reached them in time. The
Yanji battalion had selected Choe Hyon’s company, which was the
strongest. Before starting the march Choe Hyon had ensured that
every man was supplied with 150 rounds of ammunition and a new
pair of shoes. The company left Beidong and arrived at Macun by
forced march in the middle of September, when we were in
Xiaowangqing after the battle on the Dongning county town.
As we entered Luozigou with the men from Hunchun, the men
and officers of the NSA, together with the local residents,
welcomed us enthusiastically. Quite a few peasants from
227
neighbouring villages came to welcome us too. Their warm
welcome was a clear expression of the strength of the antiJapanese organizations in this place.
Behind the crowd who were waving their hands and shouting
for joy at our unit stood the able revolutionary Choe Jong Hwa.
Though in the service of Manchukuo, as the head of the AntiJapanese Association in Luozigou, he worked, in fact, mostly for
the NSA in the capacity of a member of the anti-Japanese soldiers’
committee, and he publicized widely the correctness of our line of
an anti-Japanese allied front in Luozigou. He encouraged people to
supply the NSA units with food grain and cloth.
We lined up in the street where the Chinese people lived, and
made speeches appealing for an anti-Japanese national salvation
movement. Then we danced and sang in groups. Even the Chinese
shopkeepers along the street suspended their business and came
out in the street to enjoy the performance. As the guerrillas and the
NSA soldiers mingled with one another the town of Luozigou
became animated and festive. The whole town, both the Korean
and Chinese streets, was enveloped in a holiday atmosphere.
Young people who had heard of us jostled each other to see
Commander Kim. They were arguing over whether Commander
Kim hailed from Phyongan Province, or Hamgyong Province, or
Kyongsang Province.
The children were keen to touch the Model 38 rifles and
cartridge belts. Each soldier wore three cartridge belts, one on the
waist and two across his shoulders. As one belt contained 100
228
cartridges, every one was carrying a load of 300.
Large numbers of women came and tugged at the guerrillas’
arms, saying, “Men fighting for the country, join us for lunch.”
Even women living several miles away from Luozigou brought
lunch and served the guerrillas.
On the day of our arrival at Luozigou, I, accompanied by those
working on the coordination commission, paid a visit to
Commander Wu Yi-cheng at his lodging.
As old acquaintances, we had an amicable conversation. It was
a candid conversation between two men, not a conversation
designed to fathom each other’s thoughts, like the first one we had
in June.
What had worried me most on my way to Luozigou was
whether Commander Wu had given up the idea of fighting the
battle or not in the meantime. I wondered whether such people
as Ri Chong Chon, who were not pleased with the alliance,
might not have persuaded Wu Yi-cheng to abandon the idea of
the battle and set back the relations between the NSA and
ourselves to the state preceding our negotiations. Those
working on the coordination commission had informed me on
several occasions of Ri Chong Chon’s ceaseless efforts to get
Chai Shi-rong to abort our cooperation. They had been
apprehensive that this trick might affect Commander Wu.
But they need not have worried. His commitment to the allied
front remained unchanged, and his determination to redeem his
previous defeat through the attack on the Dongning county town
229
was as firm as ever.
What Commander Wu felt was most ignominious was the blow
he had suffered during the Japanese “mopping-up” operation in
Luozigou at the end of 1932. At that time the Japanese had
mobilized ten air force fighters and hundreds of troops and crushed
the NSA mercilessly. Luozigou had been reduced to ashes and the
NSA driven away to Chengnancun, Xintunzi and Shitouhezi.
“To be honest, our numbers were greater than the Japanese. But
we abandoned Luozigou and fled to the mountainous area.
Whenever I am reminded of the defeat we suffered at that time, I
cannot sleep. Even though the Japanese ruffians who occupied
Luozigou beheaded innocent people and hung their heads on the
south gate, we remained entrenched in the mountainous area
without so much as a thought of revenge. We were simply afraid
of the Japanese army. What shame! I will make them pay dearly
for it at Dongning.”
As he said this, Wu frequently put his hand on the Mauser on
his side. As I saw him burning with thoughts of revenge, I realized
that his determination had not lessened. It was a good omen for the
allied front.
That day I told him the story of my past life in outline, as I had
done to Pan, the member of the provincial party committee. In
return Commander Wu told me his own personal history. Through
the unceremonious talk of that day I learned that his native district
was somewhere near Dongchang in Shandong Province and he had
the nickname of Wu Ji-cheng. When we were holding our
230
conversation two of our guerrillas stood sentry on the roof of
Commander Wu’s lodging. The NSA organized a strict watch
around the headquarters that day.
That day Wu Yi-cheng talked as the rumours portrayed him,
lounging idly on a tigerskin. He disliked talking formally, sitting
crosslegged on a chair, probably because he was corpulent. So I
had to talk to him while I lounged with my arm across a wooden
pillow.
Wu Yi-cheng ordered his men to prepare delicious food for
lunch as he had a distinguished guest. I told him I had brought my
own food and there was no need to take the trouble to prepare
lunch for me. The man who accompanied us and carried our meals
in those days was a Chinese soldier with a pockmarked face. Wu
was very interested in the fact that I was speaking fluent Chinese.
The knowledge of Chinese I had acquired thanks to my father
proved its worth in my work with Wu Yi-cheng.
In Luozigou, the Wangqing and Hunchun companies discussed
on several occasions the tactics for political work among the
people.
We stressed the following to the guerrillas; the future direction
of the NSA depends on the result of this battle; if our guerrilla
army fights bravely in the van the NSA will follow us; if we fail to
play our part, they will abandon us; so you must always set an
example both in everyday life and in the battle; we are going to
fight this battle for the sake of the allied front rather than for a few
rifles and sacks of grain; we are staking the future of the allied
231
front on this battle; let the NSA soldiers win all the trophies; let us
not care what they take, no matter what it is, even opium; but let us
keep in mind that there will be no concessions in the political and
moral aspects of our conduct.
Brigadier-general Shi Zhong-heng, one of the leaders of the
Chinese nationalist units, supported the plan of the battle most
actively. During our stay in Luozigou a friendship transcending
nationality and affiliation sprang up between Shi and myself.
When the large forces of our guerrilla army and the NSA units
were marching towards the Dongning county town from Luozigou
he tried to stay near our unit all the time. When bivouacking he
tried to pitch his tents near ours and act together with our unit in
the battle. During the march of a hundred miles from Luozigou to
the Dongning county town, we came to understand each other on a
deeper level.
The expeditionary forces which had left Luozigou in early
September spent several days on the road. The march was a clear
demonstration of the noble revolutionary spirit and sincere humane
traits of the Korean communists. The political and moral
differences between the AJPGA and the NSA were clearly
expressed during the march and in our daily life.
Wherever we went, we behaved as an army of the people. We
did not destroy the mountain shrines on our way nor lay our hands
on the delicious foods offered in sacrifice; we did not give it a
second glance. When we stopped at Chinese villages we held
parties, hung posters on the walls and conducted oral propaganda.
232
Other units caused the villagers much trouble, but we helped them
in fetching water, grinding grain, threshing and weaving cornstalks
for fences. In the villages where Koreans were living we read to
them from story-books.
Since we behaved in this way, the people made rice cakes and
killed pigs for us, saying that our army really appreciated them.
They said that other units were hopelessly bad-tempered and rude,
but Commander Kim’s unit was so gentle, affable and warmhearted that they spared nothing in their efforts to please us.
Whenever he witnessed the sincere loving care we took of the
people and the genuine support and welcome the people accorded
us, Brigadier-general Shi Zhong-heng praised us profusely,
holding his thumb up, and saying that Commander Kim’s army
was a unique gentlemen’s army. On several occasions he
instructed his men that they should follow the example of the
communist army led by Commander Kim.
“At present some villains are disgracing the NSA in the van of
our column. You should not follow their example. God will bless
you only if your manners are noble. I hereby warn you in advance
that if any unpleasant acts such as toying with women, laying
hands on others’ property or blustering at people should occur, the
man will be strictly dealt with, whoever he may be.”
Shi Zhong-heng’s orders were effective in alerting his men to
the need for good behaviour.
Some soldiers of the NSA took flight at the sight of grain stacks
on moonless nights, saying that the stacks were Japanese soldiers.
233
After this occurred several times we made our guerrilla army
march in the van of the column and the NSA units were made to
bring up the rear. This insignificant measure inspired the guerrillas
to new efforts. They realized very keenly that victory in the battle
did not depend on the NSA soldiers who confused grain stacks
with Japanese soldiers, but on themselves, that they themselves
were the decisive force driving the wheel of the allied front, and
they speeded up the march.
The guerrillas studied even on the march. They sometimes
argued about serious political subjects.
“Hey, Comrade Kang, will you please explain the purpose of
our attack on the Dongning county town clearly and wittily? When
the Commander told us about it in Luozigou it seemed
understandable but somehow it seems hard to grasp now.”
The wily question came from a man at the tail of the Wangqing
company as the expeditionary forces were nearing Laoheishan. He
did not ask it out of ignorance; he wanted to test his understanding.
Kang, who had been asked the question, was also a wily man.
“Ah, look at him. Trying to roast his crab on someone else’s
fire. If you are so hazy about it, then I will tell you. If I must, I will
sing it to the tune of the Ten-point Song.”
And he really did begin to sing it without giving the asker a
chance to speak.
What is first?
Realizing the allied front
234
Even though the heavens collapse,
This is first.
What is second?
Expanding our unique guerrilla zone, the citadel,
To the Soviet-Manchurian border,
This is second.
What is third?
Clearing the passage to the Soviet Union
Which is welcoming even in chilly weather,
This is third.
... ... ...
Pak, who asked the question, was struck speechless and
gestured in astonishment.
“Your talent is worth far more than its weight in gold. The
purpose is as clear as the full moon in a blue sky even to such a
stupid man as me.”
Kang, the talent of the Wangqing company, deserved this
admiration. He was able to encapsulate in that song the
complicated circumstances of World War I and the appalling
course of political calamities beginning with the outburst of the
September 18 incident to the foundation of the Kingdom of
Manchukuo.
His song, which expressed the purpose of the battle poetically
235
in simple words, spread in no time from the Wangqing company to
the Hunchun company, to the brigade of Shi Zhong-heng and to
Chai Shi-rong’s unit. Some of the NSA soldiers hummed the song
on the march. The NSA soldiers tried their best to follow the
example set by our unit.
But not all the officers and men of the NSA behaved in that way
. Many of them were expecting a windfall, dreaming of the
trophies they would be distributing before long. I could seldom
find the soldiers who were talking, with noble anti-Japanese
sentiment, about expanding the area of operations to the border
area of the Soviet Union and Manchuria or restoring Manchuria
through a strong and secure allied front with the AJPGA.
One of Shi Zhong-heng’s soldiers marching in the rear of our
unit asked one of his companions, “Hey, will there be much opium
in Dongning?”
“Well, it may be easily obtainable as there is a regiment of the
puppet Manchukuo army there. They cannot exist without opium,
can they? But why are you talking about opium all of a sudden
when you don’t smoke it?” said the other, glancing at him
dubiously.
“Why! Opium is the same as money, and money is opium. They
say you can fly to Yangzhou on a crane if you have a lot of
money.”
“You are right! They say one cannot see the sights of Hangzhou
without money. You can go to Hangzhou and Xuzhou with opium
which is worth a lot of money. All I want to get is a Japanese-
236
made electric torch.”
“Don’t worry about a small thing like that. You can surely get
one, since there are so many Japanese soldiers.”
“Don’t talk so big. Opium and electric torches can only be
taken when the battle ends in victory. Do you think the town will
be so simple to capture?”
This conversation I overheard weighed heavily on my mind.
Would those soldiers of the NSA who were preoccupied with
trophies fight hand to hand with “the warriors of the invincible
imperial army”? Would they charge like human bullets at the
enemy’s battery, for the sake of the Republic of China?
There was something unsettling in their way of talking and their
gloomy eyes. It was a bad omen.
In Laoheishan we held a joint meeting of the Wangqing and
Hunchun guerrilla units and once again conducted political work
to give them a clear understanding of the purpose of the battle and
its military and political significance.
Afterwards we advanced to the area of Gaoancun and
Wushegou near the Dongning county town, and there we
reconfirmed the enemy’s condition and decided upon the plan of
battle. That night we located the underground party organization
near Dongning. It was an organization Pan had formed in
Dongning, Gaoancun, Xinlicun, and Laoheishan and which he had
guided while he was working as the secretary of the Suining
central county party committee. It had been exposed and tracked
down by the enemy in the spring of 1932; some of its members
237
had escaped to Wangqing and the others, remaining in Dongning,
had gone into hiding. At that time Pan had sent not only party
members and Young Communist Leaguers but also many
guerrillas and civilians to Wangqing.
When leaving for Hunchun, Pan had asked me to locate and
contact the party and YCL members hidden underground, reestablish their line of organization and take good care of them for
him if I had a chance of going to Dongning. Faithful to his request
when we announced in Luozigou the programme of the political
work among the people, I included an item on reconstructing the
underground party organization in Dongning County through
efficient political work among local population.
We restructured the underground party organization in
Dongning County with some party members we found in
Gaoancun and its vicinity, and re-established its line of
organizational guidance in such a way that the underground party
organization in Luozigou guided its activities. This organization
furnished us with a lot of information. Thanks to its efforts we
opened a passage to the Soviet Union without difficulty.
This organization continued to exist in good condition until the
1940s, implementing our orders for secret operations to the letter.
Following the meeting at Xiaohaerbaling we frequently used this
passage when the Korean People’s Revolutionary Army was
operating in small units from the secret camps around Mt. Paektu
and training camps in Khabarovsk, the Soviet Union. Many small
units used to travel through this passage to the homeland and
238
Jiandao and enter the border area of the Soviet Union and
Manchuria from Mt. Paektu. Individual operatives who were sent
to the homeland used this passage when travelling to the Maritime
Province of the Soviet Union.
The small unit of Jon Mun Uk, which had been operating on a
reconnaissance mission in the Soviet-Manchurian frontier region,
also received much help from this underground party organization
in Dongning. Ya. T. Novichenko3, an internationalist soldier who
served at that time in the army on the opposite side of Dongning
County on the Soviet-Manchurian border, recalled that he saw
small units of the KPRA making frequent use of this passage. The
underground organizations in Dongning were active in harassing
the enemy’s rear at the time of the war against Japan, and rendered
great assistance in the liberation of the county town.
From talks with the inhabitants of Gaoancun and the local area,
and with members of the secret organizations, we learned that the
regimental commander of the puppet Manchukuo army was
strongly anti-Japanese, even though he served Manchukuo, and
that there was bitter discord between the puppet Manchukuo army
and the Japanese garrison in spite of their apparently peaceful
relations. They said that the regimental commander was on good
terms with Chinese shopkeepers in the county town and he
acceded to their requests. The members of the underground party
organization were well acquainted with the shopkeepers. We
ordered these members to bring influence to bear on the
shopkeepers in order to get the regimental commander to agree to
239
collaborate with us.
The battle of the Dongning county town began on the night of
September 6, 1933, and ended at noon on September 7. I think
there were not many instances of battles lasting for 2 days in our
war against Japan.
The main thrust of our attack on the county town was directed
against a two-storeyed fort built on a mountain ridge outside the
west gate. Several heavy and light machineguns were mounted in
the fort. They had constructed a secret underground passage and a
deep communication trench between the fort and the command
post of the Japanese aggressors’ army unit, so as to counter the
enemy’s attack by continuously throwing in reinforcements as
necessary. This fort was responsible for the NSA’s failure in their
attack on the county town.
I posted the Hunchun company which was to block the enemy’s
reinforcements at a place called Jjajakgol and ordered the
Wangqing company to advance along the main line of attack and
seize the fort.
At 9 p.m. a demolition party from our unit, which had
approached the enemy’s line by stealth, concentrated its fire on the
fort when my shot gave the signal for the attack on the town. The
enemy reinforced his troops continuously through the
communication trench and the underground passage. The fierce
engagement between our forces and the enemy lasted for hours.
I made the guerrilla unit which had stormed into the town
through the west gate blockade the enemy’s barracks while other
240
forces bypassed the fort to the north so as to divert the enemy’s
fire; then I sent in the demolition team to seize the fort by means
of a violent bomb attack. The fort abandoned resistance and fell
quiet near dawn. Our main force surrounded the barracks of the
Japanese garrison in tight formation and mercilessly checked the
enemy’s desperate attempt to launch a counterattack. Some of the
Japanese narrowly escaped through the north gate.
NSA units which had entered the town in advance in civilian
disguise, and the other NSA units which had charged into the town
through the east and south gates took up their specified places and
fought the enemy.
The headquarters of the puppet Manchukuo army unit sent a
representative to us to convey its acceptance of our proposal to
attack the Japanese aggressors in joint operation. If the scheme had
gone smoothly, the whole town would have fallen into our hands.
At that moment, however, some of Chai Shi-rong’s units began
plundering the shops under the control of the puppet Manchukuo
army and robbing civilian houses; this caused the puppet
Manchukuo army to withdraw from the agreement and instead
launch an all-out attack on us. The Japanese garrison joined this
attack.
Some of the NSA units, scared at the vigour of the enemy’s
attack, deserted the areas they had occupied and began to flee from
the town.
Nevertheless, our unit, succeeding in pinning the enemy into a
corner of the town, expanded the area we occupied by means of
241
all-out street fighting. Encouraged by this, the NSA units then
occupied the munitions factory and raided the munitions yards.
The street fighting continued for hours.
Recognizing that the purpose of the joint operation had been
largely accomplished, I gave orders to withdraw. Guerrilla units
that had withdrawn on their own initiative provided covering fire
for the withdrawing NSA units.
At this moment we were informed that Brigadier-general Shi
Zhong-heng had been seriously wounded and was still in the town.
His men had fled the town, leaving their commander in the jaws of
death. His aide-de-camp had not assisted him, either.
In my mind’s eye I saw the NSA soldiers who had been talking
about trophies. When I heard them dreaming about opium and
electric torches, I had been apprehensive of pillage and the effect it
might have on the course of the battle. Such pillage had taken
place during the battle. And then, to our surprise, the soldiers had
deserted their commander. In general soldiers regard their superior
officers as their fathers or mothers. So in a sense, the NSA
soldiers had fled, leaving their parent in the jaws of death. I had
heard many stories of soldiers’ conduct in war, but I had never
heard of such dereliction of duty. There were links between the
NSA soldiers’ pillage and their faithless desertion of their
commander. The greed for material wealth had been overflowed
into an extreme of egoism and cowardice.
A dipper that leaks in the house will also leak outside–how
profound the truth of this proverb handed down to us by our
242
ancestors!
A battle may be regarded as an extension and concise
expression of everyday life. Soldiers’ success in battle is always
determined in advance in their everyday life, not on the battlefield.
A battle is no more than the epitome and reflection of that life.
History knows no case of an army with inferior moral fibre
being crowned with victory. The Nazi army of Hitler’s Germany
trembled to defeat mainly because they were morally inferior,
having abandoned moral principles and driven their caterpillar
tracks roughshod over the good and beautiful. The main reason
why the Japanese army, which boasted of its invincibility, met its
end was also its moral leprosy. Japan could not avoid being
smothered by the encirclement of the allied forces and billions of
honest-minded people who condemned and hated the Japanese
army as the most brutal and shameless in the world. Never in the
history of war has there been such a barbarous army as the
Japanese army which invaded other countries and slaughtered their
peoples, even taking “comfort girls” with them to battlefields.
War is not only a contest of strength, but also a test of morality
and ethics. An army that neglects the influence which morality
exerts on the course of a war or regards it as an inessential
adornment is no more than a heap of rubbish.
I ordered Choe Chun Guk to rescue Shi Zhong-heng.
Choe and his men risked their lives to carry out my orders.
Carrying Shi, who had been rescued by our guerrillas, on our
backs and covering our withdrawal with fire, we withdrew safely
243
onto a hill. The guerrillas abused Shi’s men who had abandoned
him as cursed cowards. The NSA soldiers deserved this abuse for
their behaviour. But the relationship between the NSA and
ourselves was not damaged by this affair.
The battle of the Dongning county town was significant not
only because we killed several hundred enemy soldiers. The
important point was that after going through this battle the NSA
had full confidence in the Korean communists. The Anti-Japanese
People’s Guerrilla Army was able to act in east Manchuria as
proudly and legitimately as before while flying a red flag. This
battle implanted the true image of the Korean communists in the
minds of the NSA soldiers.
Afterwards the Chinese anti-Japanese nationalist units would of
their own free will beat those who attempted to harm our unit.
“September 7, 1933 is the day when I was born again. My life
from that day was bestowed on me by Commander Kim, while my
life until then was bestowed on me by my parents. I owe him my
life; the AJPGA is the first brother of our national salvation army.”
These were Shi Zhong-heng’s words when he regained
consciousness.
His words spread a legendary tale to every corner of Manchuria,
the legend that the AJPGA was a paragon of noble, self-sacrificing
spirit and loyal comradeship.
On our way back from the Dongning county town to Luozigou,
a journey of a hundred miles, I was constantly at the side of
Brigadier-general Shi. All through the first day, we carried him on
244
a stretcher. Even though they saw their commander was being
carried by the guerrillas, the NSA soldiers dared not approach the
stretcher and only watched him from a distance. His aide-de-camp
and some of his men asked us to hand over their commander to
them, but the guerrillas refused, and sent them away.
When his aide-de-camp approached our column for the third
time, I ordered my men to hand over the stretcher. I persuaded the
guerrillas by saying that the men had consciences, so they might
feel sorry for their mistake, and even if we only granted the right
to carry the stretcher, they would be able to atone for their crime to
a small degree.
When we handed Shi Zhong-heng over, the NSA soldiers
bowed to us graciously. Brigadier-general Shi greatly regretted the
behaviour of his men, and he apologized to us as a commanding
officer for his subordinates’ misbehaviour.
“I am ashamed in front of you, Commander Kim, for these
creatures of no account. It is because I have not educated them
properly, so please blame me if you will, and have mercy on my
men.”
I was moved by his regarding his men’s shame as his own. I
would not have been so deeply moved had he given vent to his
anger against his men or felt even a little bitterness against them.
He was indeed a generous, fair-minded soldier. I said:
“As the Chinese proverb has it, even a sweet melon hangs on a
bitter stalk. A man cannot always be perfect nor a flower be
beautiful for a thousand days. You have regained consciousness
245
following a serious wound, and we are satisfied with that.”
“Another Chinese proverb says that if a man wants to buy a
horse he should study his teeth, and if he wants to make a friend he
should know the other person’s mind. I will take it as a godsend
that I made your acquaintance, Commander Kim, and treasure the
gift for all my life.”
Shi Zhong-heng, a dozen or more years older than I, became my
blood-bound comrade-in-arms as we worked to establish the antiJapanese allied front. After the battle of the Dongning county town
he moved his unit to Xibeigou near Macun. We frequently visited
each other as one visits relatives, and deepened our friendship.
I sent him various medicines for the treatment of his bullet
wound, and exposed him to communist influence in an attempt to
transform his ideology. As a result, he joined the Communist Party
and became a commander of the people’s revolutionary army.
He fought well in the anti-Japanese joint operations at Luozigou
in June 1934, and rendered highly distinguished service as
commander of the 2nd Independent Division after his unit was
incorporated into the people’s revolutionary army. In every battle
he would lead the charge at the enemy’s positions with a Mauser
in his hand. This led his men to believe that he was the bravest
commanding officer in the world. The soldiers of the other NSA
units also respected and adored him. Quite a few of them
transferred to Shi Zhong-heng’s unit.
He was fatally wounded in the abdomen while leading a charge
at the battle of Laosongling. The bullet did not pass through him,
246
lodging in the intestines. He went to the Soviet Union to have the
bullet removed, but breathed his last there. When I heard others
were mourning his death, I remembered him with aching grief.
Chai Shi-rong, who had joined us in the anti-Japanese front
amid the flames of battle in the Dongning county town, was later
transferred to the people’s revolutionary army, becoming vicecommander and then commander of its 5th Army Corps. He made
great efforts to maintain friendly ties with us when he was fighting
under Zhou Bao-zhong in north Manchuria. I kept in close touch
with him even as late as the early 1940s.
When the allied front between the AJPGA and the NSA had
apparently become too strong to break as a result of the battle of
the Dongning county town, an unexpected incident occurred which
threatened to damage it.
The root cause was a remark by Wu Yi-cheng in praise of Jiang
Jie-shi. After returning to Luozigou we held a joint meeting to
review the battle. Wu Yi-cheng spoke first. Speaking about the
victory of the combined forces in the battle, he suddenly began to
extol Jiang Jie-shi and went on to say that the anti-Japanese war in
the northeast of China would only be brought to a triumphant
conclusion when Jiang sent guns and reinforcements from the
south. This provoked the guerrillas to anger.
Paek Il Phyong, who was there as the commander of the
Hunchun guerrilla unit, took the floor and accused Commander
Wu, who had praised and supported Jiang Jie-shi, of being a
reactionary, asking how Jiang could possibly assist and lead us
247
when the whole world knew that he was a running dog of
imperialism.
In a blaze of anger Wu had him arrested and threatened to have
him shot.
At this point, Paek’s men rebelled. They protested: we did not
lose a single rank-and-file guerrilla during the battle, and it is not
logical to lose our commanding officer for the sake of the allied
front; how could we possibly return to Hunchun after losing our
commanding officer? we must save Comrade Paek Il Phyong even
if it means fighting with Wu Yi-cheng to the last man of our unit.
They were about to dash out with rifles in their hands.
The NSA soldiers had taken their rifles and were preparing to
fire back.
In this hair-trigger situation a single gunshot would result in
wholesale deaths and the disruption of the allied front which had
cost so much effort. Wu Yi-cheng turned pale and pursed his lips.
I jumped up on the platform and argued with both sides, in
Korean and Chinese, and tried to reason with Wu Yi-cheng:
“You may feel angry, Commander Wu, but be generous and set
Paek Il Phyong free. It was most presumptuous of him to call you
a reactionary, and impugn your dignity, but you, too, must think
this matter over. Will others listen willingly to your praise of Jiang
Jie-shi when the whole China condemns him as a puppet of the
imperialists? It was he who kept telling Zhang Xue-liang not to
fight against Japan before the September 18 incident. If you kill
Paek, the whole of Manchuria will call you a traitor to the nation,
248
so please give the matter deep thought.”
As I finished my speech, some of the NSA soldiers asked
themselves, “Who is that man? Is he from the south? A
delegate from the Kuomintang?” Others answered, “From
the south? No. He is Kim Il Sung, the commander of the
guerrilla army.”
“I spoke as I did out of ignorance, please do not regard me as
the same kind of man as Jiang Jie-shi,” Wu Yi-cheng said, and
declared he would withdraw his order to have Paek killed.
However, two days later he still had not released him. The rankand-file soldiers of the NSA accused their commander of
foolhardiness, saying, “Why does not Commander Wu keep his
promise to Commander Kim?” Some of Wu’s men said,
“Everything will be alright if we do not shoot him. Can he kill any
man he wants?” Another said, “Our national salvation army will be
cursed if we kill him.”
While the masses of the soldiers were agitated in this way, the
officers lodged letters and petitions with Wu Yi-cheng, urging the
release of Paek Il Phyong. Paek was released from detention by
Wu after 3 days.
The process of cementing the allied front with the Chinese
nationalist army units was beset with many such painful incidents;
perseverance and sacrifice were required. How could the two
“organisms” with the different blood types be effectively
combined without difficulties and distress?
For three successive days the enemy cremated the bodies of the
249
soldiers who had been killed in the battle. Meanwhile, we lost Hu
Jin-min. He was killed by an accidental shot on our way back to
Luozigou.
250
4. A Comment on Ultra-Democracy
 in the Army
The Soviet line was a Leftist tendency in the establishment of
government; military ultra-democracy was a Leftist ideological
tendency which occurred in the command and administration of
the army. It advocated absolute equality for every soldier,
irrespective of his rank, in the command and administration of the
army. In other words, it advocated excessive equalitarianism in all
aspects of military activity, regarding it as an absolute.
It was while we were directing the guerrilla army on our
return to Wangqing from the campaign in south Manchuria that
we first encountered the practice of ultra-democracy in the
guerrilla army. At that time the tendency was at an incipient
stage, and its effects were not serious.
As I acquainted myself with the work of the guerrilla army on
my return to Wangqing after the battle of the Dongning county
town, I realized that the ultra-democracy which had barely been
germinating had now assumed definite weight in the command
system of the army and was paralysing that system.
251
The alarm was first raised concerning the danger of ultrademocracy in Dahuanggou, Hunchun County, in the autumn of
1933. Dahuanggou was a central guerrilla zone in Hunchun. Pan,
the inspector from the Comintern, was murdered there by Pak Tu
Nam. At the same place, 13 soldiers of the Hunchun guerrilla unit
who had fought in the Dongning county town were all killed in a
single incident, bringing grief to all the people in east Manchuria.
A group of guerrillas who had returned to the guerrilla zone
after the review of the battle held at Luozigou broke the fatigue of
their journey for a while at a solitary house, celebrating Chusok or
the day of the Harvest Moon. They relaxed the following day and
the day after that, with a guard posted. A Japanese garrison
discovered them and surprised them by surrounding the house by
night.
The wisest thing to do in such a situation would have been to
strike at the enemy’s weak point and quickly fight a way through
the enemy’s encirclement. To do this the commander needed to
judge the situation properly and make a prompt decision. But the
company commander had no right to make a decision. One of the
men was O Pin, an experienced soldier, but his words carried no
weight because he had been demoted by the Leftists from the post
of head of the military department of the county party committee
to a mere soldier.
The Leftists who were in the higher levels of the leadership of
the party bodies in those days did not allow the commanders the
right to make a decision on military affairs. They maintained that
252
everything concerning military operations must always be
discussed at meetings and decided collectively, on the principle of
majority rule. This became an iron rule which no one could ever
break in the command and administration structures of the army,
binding the commanders hand and foot. This abuse of democracy
in military affairs weighed so heavily even on able commanding
officers that it produced a state of functional paralysis.
Even at the critical moment when the armed enemy was
tightening his encirclement in order to destroy them, they
continued their nonsensical argument over whether to stand and
fight the enemy or break out of the encirclement. Some sensible
men insisted that they should fight, and not continue their empty
talk until they were all destroyed, but the ultra-democrats declared
that no military action should be taken without a decision of the
meeting.
This was nothing short of criminal suicide for the besieged
guerrillas. While they continued their futile argument, the enemy
fell upon them. Only then did the guerrillas stop arguing and begin
fighting. The enemy fire mowed down 13 guerrillas.
Only a few of them escaped death by a miracle. One of them
came to Wangqing at O Pin’s request and told me the details of
how the 13 men had been killed.
Paek Il Phyong and O Pin were among the dead.
The soldier from Hunchun told me that, as he was elbowing his
way through the heap of dead bodies, O Pin, with his intestines
tumbling out of a wound in his belly, had said with his last breath:
253
“I have no right to order you, but I am telling you as a party
member to report this incident to Comrade Kim Il Sung without
fail.”
I cursed the advocates of ultra-democracy and the dogmatists
who had blindly followed them in battle. Had it not been for the
obstacle of this ultra-democracy, the Hunchun company could
have broken the siege and averted such tragic losses.
These 13 comrades are still fresh in my memory; they had
shared life in the shadow of death with me in the Dongning county
town. As we were withdrawing from the town after the battle, they
had come over fresh from their blocking mission, shaken my
hands, set me on their shoulders, and tossed me in the air, saying
that the Wangqing company had fought well. At the memorial
service for the fallen comrades they had cried bitterly as they made
speeches.
I felt my heart choked at the news that these men of such
burning passion and love had all been killed in one night.
Of these 13, O Pin was the most unforgettable. He had been
introduced to me by Chae Su Hang when we were building
revolutionary organizations around the six towns in the northern
frontier region of Korea. While Chae was attending the Taesong
Middle School in Longjing, O Pin had attended the Tonghung
Middle School in the same town. Both schools had produced many
figures of social importance and independence fighters. They had
participated in the student movement together in Longjing. O Pin,
together with Chae Su Hang, had attended the Kongsudok meeting
254
and the winter Mingyuegou meeting which we convened. They
had taken an active part in the discussion of the policy on the
armed struggle.
It was probably in May 1931, that O Pin and Chae Su Hang
guided me to Jongsong, the birthplace of Chae. My first step on
Sinhung village after crossing the Tuman River with them on a
smuggling boat is still as vivid in my memory as if it happened
yesterday. Drinking in with profound emotion the beautiful
verdure on the willowy bank and the ancient scene of the old castle
site, we talked at length about the future of the motherland.
In the spring of that year, outside the north gate at Sinhung
village, I met O Pin’s father, O Ui Son, who was the head of the
Anti-Imperialist Union in Jongsong. He had been eking out a
living by sharecropping in Chatiaogou, Yanji County; when his
son became a career revolutionary he had moved to Sinhung
village with his family, and his house soon became a secret liaison
point linking the AJPGA in the Wangqing area with all the
underground revolutionary organizations in Jongsong County in
the homeland.
Every time I went to Sinhung village, O Pin’s family served me
noodles. We spent the Tano festival or the fifth day of the fifth
lunar month at this house in 1933. On that occasion O Ui Son went
to a market in Phunggye, eight miles away, to buy buckwheat
flour, and he made buckwheat noodles for us for lunch, noodles
that reminded me of Pyongyang cold noodles.
One of the many things I still cannot forget is that we struck an
255
artesian well in the yard of his house that day, to relieve the
family’s suffering from a shortage of water. I worked with the
spade as hard as if I were O Pin, who was then fighting in
Hunchun.
When I met O Pin at Luozigou before the battle of the
Dongning county town, I said that his father in Sinhung village
had served us buckwheat noodles for the Tano festival. When he
heard this, his pleasure was evident. Even though he had been
demoted to a soldier from the post of military department head of
Hunchun County, he was not in the least disaffected or dispirited.
As I encouraged him not to lose heart, he said, “I am in high
spirits, as you can see. My demotion cannot make me Kim Pin or
Pak Pin. Nevertheless, I do not feel like working in Hunchun any
more. I am thinking of moving to Wangqing after the battle, if my
superior permits it. What do you think of the idea?”
I answered, “I will be happy if you come to Wangqing. But
remember that there are a lot of Leftists willing to brand people as
‘Minsaengdan’ members in Wangqing, too.”
“Is that so?”
“The Leftist wind never dies away in Wangqing.”
“But I think I should feel light-hearted beside you. In any case,
I shall come to Wangqing, come what may. When I say something
I stick to it.”
When we attacked the fort in the west of the town, he led the
line of advance with a grenade in his hand. He was highly
commended for this at the meeting to review the battle.
256
When the units were parting with one another at Luozigou after
the meeting he reaffirmed his firm intention. His resolve to come
to Wangqing was unshakable. He said his determination had been
strengthened when he saw the guerrillas from Wangqing capturing
the fort and charging into the town during the battle. Naturally I
promised him my full cooperation.
However, the sad news of O Pin’s death reached Wangqing
before I could keep that promise. Ri Kwang had been murdered in
the spring, and Pan, the member of the provincial party committee,
had been killed in the summer; today O Pin had gone to the world
of no return without realizing his long-cherished desire.
The sad news of the death of 13 warriors including O Pin came
as a bolt from the blue. Ever since then I have shuddered at the
mention of ultra-democracy in military affairs, and never tolerated
the slightest tendency towards it in our ranks.
This tendency was so repugnant to me because it was utterly
destructive of revolutionary practice.
We still regard it as an absolute principle that all questions
concerning military operations must be discussed by Party
organizations and welcome that the creative opinions of the masses
must be incorporated into the planning of military operations via
the Party organizations. But we do not tolerate the encroachment
of this principle of collectivism on the authority of the
commanding officers who are in charge of the administration of
their units.
In the early days of the war against the Japanese, however,
257
ultra-democracy, on the excuse of collectivism, limited the
authority of the commanding officers and paralysed the command
system in the administration of military units and conduct of
operations.
In those days, in order to stimulate the creative energy of the
party members there were party group meetings, branch meetings
and committee meetings at all levels in the guerrilla army when
military operations were being planned or during a battle, and
there were also unit meetings similar to the general servicemen’s
meeting nowadays. The principle was to consider every aspect of
the situation.
For all this, the Leftists, who regarded ultra-democracy as being
as absolute as Napoleon’s code of laws, maintained that all
military matters, irrespective of their importance and the prevailing
circumstances, should be discussed at party bodies of all levels and
at unit meetings.
Suppose the revolutionary army was to attack a town. They
discussed the plan first at a party group meeting, using a sketch
map of the town without its name, deciding whether or not it was
necessary to attack it and, if it was necessary, in what way, before
a resolution was adopted.
When the need to do battle and the possibility of victory was
confirmed at the meeting and a detailed plan of operations was
mapped out, the same process was repeated at a branch meeting.
The same procedure was followed at the unit meeting, except
that this was also attended by non-party members. They said: “We
258
are going to attack a certain town, the attack will bring us great
political and military benefits with no losses or few casualties, the
plan of operations is such and such, we will surely emerge
victorious if we fight in accordance with this plan.” Then they
passed a decision, issued battle orders and attacked the town.
Such meetings, which proceeded with agenda improvised as
suddenly as a stone thrown into a lake, involved endless
arguments, about the pros and cons of every possibility, before
conclusions were finally reached. The right to an equal vote
required by ultra-democracy resulted in time-consuming
uproarious arguments involving everyone.
Operational plans which had gone through different meetings at
different levels turned out to be useless as the enemy situation
changed in the meantime. And when such an operation was
undertaken the changed situation resulted in a heavy toll of the
forces of the revolutionary army.
The death of the 13 courageous men at Dahuanggou was a
glaring example of the influence of ultra-democracy on military
affairs.
Another expression of this abuse of democracy was the striving
to establish excessive equality and impartiality in the revolutionary
army.
Such abuses were also witnessed in the units under my
command.
One day, with Kim Myong Gyun, head of the military
department of the county party committee, I paid a visit to the
259
barracks of the 1st company to learn about its work. I found the
company commander sweeping the yard and its political instructor
chopping firewood with his men in a corner of the yard. I smiled at
the laudable sight of officers working in harmony with their men.
For some reason, however, the sight left Kim Myong Gyun
cold.
“I’m pleased to see the commanding officers setting an
example,” I said, but the department head still seemed
unimpressed. “Well, what about joining them?” I said,
approaching a besom lying in a corner of the yard.
Kim Myong Gyun tugged gently at my sleeve, saying, “Let me
show you an amazing sight.”
He ordered the duty officer to summon the company
commander and political instructor immediately.
The officer answered, “Now is the morning cleaning time.”
“Bring them here as you are ordered and no more idle talk!”
Kim Myong Gyun demanded with no more ado.
The officer’s response was not soft, either. “Then the company
commander and political instructor will be criticized at the unit
meeting.”
I casually asked Kim Myong Gyun what the officer’s answer
meant. He replied, “It means that the company commander and
political instructor must do the cleaning, setting aside everything
else, when the soldiers are cleaning, for they are equal human
beings.”
This incident occurred when ultra-democracy was still at its
260
incipient stage. This blind idea of equality was soon put into
practice by the guerrilla army, and it paralysed its command
system for some time.
It is needless to say that of course every man, and every soldier,
is equal as a human being. But in the revolutionary army–the AntiJapanese People’s Guerrilla Army or the Korean People’s Army–
every soldier is given different assignments in accordance with his
duty. One man is designated company commander, another man
platoon leader and another squad leader.
The various duties and assignments performed by soldiers place
them in the relationship of superiors and subordinates in the
revolutionary army, a company commander being superior to his
platoon leaders, a platoon leader to his squad leaders and a squad
leader to his men. The service regulations of the revolutionary
army stipulate that subordinates shall obey the orders of their
superiors without reservation. Otherwise it would be impossible to
command the army and maintain iron discipline.
The service regulations of the anti-Japanese guerrilla army fully
reflected the collective opinions of the soldiers and required the
commanding personnel to abide by the regulations willingly.
However, the Left opportunists ignored the relationship
between superiors and subordinates stipulated in the service
regulations of the AJPGA, and this inflicted serious damage on the
living tissue of the AJPGA, whose lifeblood was discipline, order
and unity between the officers and men, and it undermined the
army’s moral basis.
261
Ultra-democracy in the army was an expression of ultraegalitarianism. It even produced the unsavoury practice of soldiers
not respecting the superiors they had elected, speaking impolitely
to them or disputing their orders on the excuse of equality.
An army in which subordinates do not salute their superiors,
speak to them impolitely, or dispute their orders and instructions,
is no longer an army. It is a rabble. Can one ever expect from such
a rabble the noble comradeship and unity of ideology and purpose
that encourage men to shield their commanders from danger and
the latter to protect their men at the risk of their own lives? Can
one ever expect from it the steel-like unity that enables them to
speak with one voice, walk with the same gait and breathe as one?
Ultra-democracy in military affairs also required that a
commander should do exactly what his men did in battle. The
proverb, “Horns on the head, rosary beads on a string,” states the
simple truth that everything has its place. In other words, a
commander and his men have different duties to perform in battle.
A suckling infant is capable of understanding this.
Ultra-democrats in the army, however, preached that the
commanders should fight in the front rank both in attack and
defence, unafraid of death. This sermonizing made it impossible
for the commanders to perform their duties properly. Commanders
who were duty bound to study the combat situation from the best
vantage point all the time and command the battle from a broad
viewpoint, had to move about in the rank and file. That was why
they were unable to control their units in accordance with the
262
situation.
Certainly, a commander sometimes needs to take his place at
the head of the attacking men, or to inspect the trenches and
encourage the men by going through fire. When his personal
example is required to change an adverse situation into a
favourable one, he must, of course, stand in the front rank and
encourage his men to destroy the enemy. But doing this in every
situation is not the correct way to set an example.
When summing the results of battles in those days, commanders
who moved in the front rank of the attacking formation, away from
their command posts, were always extolled. Men would compete
with one another in praising their commanders–one saying that his
platoon leader did not fear the hail of bullets as he stood on the
hill, commanding the battle, another boasting that his company
commander jumped into the enemy’s trench several metres ahead
of his men, and another bragging that no battalion commander
could be braver in fighting the enemy hand to hand than his
battalion commander.
In this climate, the adventurist tendency to plunge, singlehanded, into the enemy’s position became endemic among the
platoon leaders, company commanders and battalion commanders
of all guerrilla units in east Manchuria, the very commanders who
should have maintained the positions defined in the battle
regulations, calculated the general development of the battle and
determined their forces’ future course of action. This tendency led
to the deaths of many platoon and company officers, the basic unit
263
commanders of the guerrilla units, in the early days of the war
against the Japanese.
A great number of these single-handed heroes were produced in
Wangqing–men such as Kim Chol, Kim Song Hyon and Ri Ung Man.
Kim Chol and Kim Song Hyon fell while leading charges in battle,
and Ri Ung Man was wounded in the ankle while leading the fighting
from the front.
Choe Hyon and Jo To On in Yanji were master-hands at the
bayonet charge, famous throughout the whole of east Manchuria.
They even carried out reconnaissance missions themselves, instead
of sending their men. They were innocent adventurers, as naive in
their actions as schoolboys, rather than military commanders.
Jo To On was a famous adventurer produced by the Yanji
guerrilla unit. He was so good at whistling that from the early days
the people in Yanji called him by the nickname of “Whistling Jo.”
Wherever he went, his nickname attracted the people’s attention.
Even when his hair was grey and he had long given up
whistling, he used to be known as “Whistling Jo,” an expression of
people’s affection for this veteran who always braved the hail of
bullets at the head of his men during the war against the Japanese.
He became so accustomed to the nickname throughout his life he
felt uncomfortable when he was called by his real name.
Once a visitor knocked at his door and asked, “Is this the house
of Comrade Jo To On?” He answered bluntly, “Not Jo To On, but
‘Whistling Jo.’ ” This reply embarrassed his visitor, but it showed
how fond he was of the nickname his comrades-in-arms had given
264
him during the anti-Japanese war.
If he had been alive, I would wish to recollect him by his
nickname which was so popular among the masses.
Jo To On did not know how to write even his parents’ names;
only when he was much older than school age did he learn how to
read and write the Korean alphabet, as well as studying the
multiplication table and a Children’s Reader. As soon as he was
able to read and write, he became a member of the organization
and the guerrilla army and then developed further to shoulder the
heavy responsibility of a company commander. This company
commander would go himself to reconnoitre enemy strongholds
within sight, come back to his company, issue orders for a raid,
and then dash like hurricane in the vanguard of the attack.
When he had captured several rifles at one time after
reconnoitring and raiding positions of the enemy’s self-defence
corps in broad daylight, the Leftists gave wide publicity to his
distinguished deed at various meetings and in the official papers.
But this was one-sided propaganda which gave no consideration to
the fact that Jo was a commanding officer who should have
refrained from such adventures. However, as a result of that
propaganda he became famous as a soldier throughout almost the
whole of east Manchuria.
He was seriously wounded in the battle of Dadianzi while
rushing at an enemy machinegun emplacement at the head of his
unit. He was so near the machinegun that a bullet which hit him in
the belly emerged diagonally from his back. His life was saved by
265
miracle, but he had to live in hospital for six years because of the
wound he received. He was unable to return to his beloved
company.
He was bedridden while the anti-Japanese armed struggle was
developing to the level of victorious, large-unit operations over
wide areas in south and north Manchuria and the homeland. The
Korean People’s Revolutionary Army became a legendary army
known to the whole world and its just struggle became a beacon of
light to the oppressed peoples of the world. This war required
efficient commanders and veterans capable of directing new
regiments and divisions. If he had not been disabled, Jo To On
could have rendered tremendous service when the war against the
Japanese was at its triumphant high tide.
The Leftists refused to pay attention to the safety of
commanders until the distorted concept of democracy was finally
eliminated from the army; it was only some time later that guards
were organized in each of the regiments and divisions to protect
the commander.
The abuse of democracy in the revolutionary army was also
expressed in the indiscriminate use of reward and punishment. The
anti-Japanese guerrilla army had a system of reward and
punishment designed to strengthen its fighting efficiency. We
rewarded soldiers who were exemplary in combat, training and
everyday life, and punished those who seriously violated the
service regulations, applying various standards according to
specific merits and demerits.
266
Ultra-democrats, however, disputed this system by arguing over
why one comrade was awarded the first prize, and another the
second prize, when they had both performed the same duty in the
same squad, over why somebody was only given a reprimand and
somebody else was given a warning when they had committed the
same mistake; thus they bolstered opinion in support of
indiscriminate application of regulations and brought pressure to
bear upon us.
This surrealistic attitude undermined the basic aim of a system
of reward and punishment. In short, ultra-democracy was a
pernicious ideological trend that ran counter to our aspirations and
efforts to foster the military, political and moral superiority of the
anti-Japanese guerrilla army and advance the anti-Japanese armed
struggle towards ultimate victory. If we had not eradicated this
ideological trend in good time, all the commanders of the guerrilla
army would sooner or later have been reduced to mere
figureheads, and the guerrilla army to a lawless collective in which
there was no distinction between the commanders and the rank and
file, and ultimately to a rabble disarmed by itself.
Ultra-democracy, no matter what specific forms it took, was an
opportunist trend derived from petit bourgeois ideology. It was, in
effect, an anarchic tendency which had nothing in common with
the revolutionary ideology of the working class.
Anarchism, a reflection of petit bourgeois ideology, derives
from an extreme hatred for authority in general and a resistance to
the political power of the bourgeoisie in particular. It attempted to
267
introduce anarchic disorder and immoderate conduct into society,
extolling ultra-democracy, radical freedom and self-indulgence.
Some radical ideologists, who represented the distress of the
petit bourgeoisie, which was economically bankrupt and politically
disenfranchised under the pressures of capitalist mass production
and the political dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, attempted to lead
the masses in opposition to state power in general by alleging that
the political power of the capitalist class should be overthrown by
violence and anarchism established.
The so-called “theory of anarchism” of such ideologists as the
French petit bourgeois, Proudhon, and Bakunin and Kropotkin in
Russia, which found expression in an extreme hatred for political
power and unreasonable demands for social equality, was a
destructive ideological trend which made it impossible to rouse the
working masses to the struggle against the repression of the
capitalists, to safeguard the gains of the revolution and establish
truly popular and democratic systems in those countries which had
overthrown the dictatorship of the exploiting class; it was
condemned by the impartial judgement of history.
Nevertheless, for some time this ideological trend gave the petit
bourgeoisie illusions about ultra-democracy and unrestricted
freedom and it spread to some extent to the regions and countries
where capitalist industry had not been developed on a large scale
and the petit bourgeois and peasant mentality remained dominant.
This is the major reason why quite a few people thought that
anarchism made certain contributions to the struggle against
268
capitalism.
Some working-class parties enlisted anarchic forces in the
struggle to overthrow the reactionary regime of the landlords and
bourgeoisie. It is well-known that the Soviet government
cooperated with Makhno and his clique, an anarchic collective in
the Ukraine, during the Civil War.
In the early days, when ultra-democracy emerged in the
guerrilla army, anarchism still existed as a political idea that
served a certain social stratum, the petit bourgeoisie in particular,
as an expression of their revolutionary character, and it inflicted
tangible harm on the revolutionary theory and practice of the
working class.
This does not mean, however, that the only form taken by ultrademocracy was anarchism. The activities of the revisionists who
emerged in the international working class movement also had
elements in common with ultra-democracy. Under the cloak of
democracy, they promoted bourgeois liberalism, anarchism,
immoderacy and disorder, and they gave rise to social confusion
and self-indulgence. In the light of this experience, we cannot but
conclude that there is an ideological community between extreme
bourgeois democracy and anarchism.
If ultra-democracy finds its way into the military sector, it will
eventually produce anarchic confusion. Had it not been eliminated
from the guerrilla army before it was too late, ultra-democracy
could have irretrievably damaged the process of building up the
guerrilla army and its military operations, and could have seriously
269
hampered the overall development of the revolutionary movement.
When we were involved in combatting it, with the firm
determination of wiping it out, a meeting of commanders and
political commissars of the guerrilla units in east Manchuria was
convened in Shiliping to review the work done in the year and half
since the guerrilla zones had been established and to take measures
to defend these zones from the enemy’s large-scale “punitive”
operations.
I met Kim Il Ryong and Kim Jong Ryong at this meeting. The
former was the commander and the latter the political commissar
of the Antu guerrilla unit. The meeting was also attended by Jang
and Cha Ryong Dok, commander and political commissar of the
Helong guerrilla unit, and Ju Jin, Pak Tong Gun and Pak Kil,
general commander, commander and political commissar of the
Yanji guerrilla unit. Some comrades also came from the Hunchun
guerrilla unit, but I cannot remember who they were.
This meeting also discussed measures for overcoming the ultrademocratic tendency in the command and administration of
guerrilla units.
We maintained that the main factor in the command of a
guerrilla unit was the authority of its commander and the
establishment of rigid discipline and centralization, that the
method of administration should give priority to political work. At
the meeting I stressed the following points: The distinctions
between the superior and the subordinate in a unit should be clear
and absolute. A commander should be steadfast and positive in
270
executing the orders issued by his superior and unswervingly carry
out a decision once he had made it. He should always take the
initiative in commanding and act with determination, without
wavering or hesitating in complicated and difficult circumstances.
But this on no account means that he may resort to subjectivism
and arbitrariness in commanding. He must know how to draw on
the energy and wisdom of the masses in executing the orders of his
superiors and in the command of battles. He should not command
his unit only by means of orders, but engage the soldiers’
conscious enthusiasm by giving priority to political work. Today’s
war is not like wars in the days of slave-owning and feudal
societies, when one contended for victory on a solitary horse; it is
a modern, people’s war in which the army and people fight as one.
The outcome of a war is decided by the ability to allow fuller
scope to the enthusiasm and creativity of the army and people.
This requires that political work should be given definite
precedence. Party meetings, unit meetings, explanations and
propaganda by agitators are powerful means for political work.
Commanders should therefore make effective use of these means.
I criticized the Hunchun guerrilla unit for its mistake in
Dahuanggou and warned the representatives from the guerrilla
units in all counties of the harmfulness of ultra-democracy in
military affairs, showing that it had led to the loss of 13 guerrillas.
Our younger generation might not easily understand or believe
the episodes I have briefly mentioned here, or the childish nature
of the infantile disorder of ultra-democracy as demonstrated in
271
these episodes. But these are the true facts.
The infiltration of this malady into the guerrilla army in the
early days of the armed struggle was a trial for those of us who
bore the heavy burden of defending the guerrilla bases and
creating the allied front while also being responsible for
administering the army.
At the meeting we stressed once again that guerrilla units
should be commanded and managed in accordance with the
principle of individual responsibility on a basis of democracy.
After the incident in Dahuanggou two contradictory tendencies
appeared in the guerrilla units. One supported the enforcement of
one-man management system with a single commander, and the
other insisted upon continued adherence to the democratic
principle in army administration. These two positions each had
merits and demerits.
Rendering the one-man management system absolute might
give rise to arbitrariness and subjectivity in the command and
administration of the army, while making democracy absolute
might deprive the army of promptness and efficiency in its
command and management. So I proposed the principle of oneman management system based on democracy for discussion.
According to this principle a commander’s responsibility to
command and administer his unit was based on a decision made by
the party organization following collective discussion. Collective
discussion based on democracy would enable complex and
difficult military tasks at each period to be carried out
272
satisfactorily by exploiting the masses’ collective wisdom,
whereas the one-man management system based on the discussion
would enhance the commander’s sense of responsibility and role in
accordance with the military requirements, the prerequisite for
which was a high degree of promptness, determination and
concerted action.
We also stressed the need to establish iron discipline in the
guerrilla army by maintaining a well-regulated system of
command within it. A commander’s orders are not an expression
of individual opinion; they are an expression of the democratic and
organizational opinion of the body of a higher level. Military
orders possess legal force and a commander is responsible before
the law for the orders he has issued. The rank and file should never
in the least degree discount or dispute orders; they are duty bound
to execute them promptly and without fail, whatever the
circumstances. Commanders should command and supervise the
carrying out of their orders in an appropriate manner.
We also discussed the tasks of creating a sound ideological
atmosphere in the units and of consolidating revolutionary unity
between the superiors and subordinates by intensifying the study
of communist ideology and the struggle against such petit
bourgeois ideologies as the infantile equality and anarchism
pursued by ultra-democracy in military affairs.
The meeting at Shiliping enlightened the commanders of the
guerrilla army. In the subsequent trials of repeated battle ultrademocracy was eliminated from the army once and for all.
273
Had we not completely overcome ultra-democracy in the army
in the early days of the anti-Japanese war, we would not have been
able to consolidate the invincible ranks of the Korean People’s
Army in such a short period of time after liberation, nor would we
have emerged victorious in the fight against the international allied
forces of imperialism headed by US imperialism.
It is now a matter of course that our People’s Army contains
neither those who insist on unprincipled equality and impartiality
nor those who dispute their superiors’ orders. The soldiers answer
their superiors’ orders only by saying, “I understand!” Our
People’s Army is a collective of loyal soldiers who live in a spirit
of unity of superiors and subordinates, unity of army and people, a
spirit of constant self-reliance and fortitude from the day they take
the oath of the military code of conduct to the moment they are
discharged from the service.
If anyone wishes to know our soldiers’ attitude towards
democracy, he need only understand their militant slogan, “When
the Party decides, we do everything!” If he wants to see the
genuine features of unity between superiors and subordinates
manifested in the deeds of our soldiers, he need only learn of the
last moments of Heroes Kim Kwang Chol4 and Han Yong Chol5,
who had sacrificed their lives for the sake of many of their
comrades-in-arms.
Ultra-democracy was liquidated a long time ago, but it must
still be guarded against.
We safeguard democracy but oppose ultra-democracy; we
274
maintain equality but we regard ultra-egalitarianism as taboo,
because both of these extremes invite revisionism. There are quite
a number of people on the Earth who are anxious to see our style
of socialism corrupted by the filthy germ of revisionism. Our
people and the People’s Army therefore never tolerate the
infiltration of our ranks by revisionism. We do not want our Party
to be reduced to a club or a market-place by the tendency of ultrademocracy. The suffering inflicted upon us by the evils of ultrademocracy in military affairs during the anti-Japanese war and the
lessons of Eastern Europe cry out to us that we must not allow this.
275
5. Operation Macun
An epidemic of fever broke out in the guerrilla zone in the
autumn of that year. This acute disease, with the symptoms of
chill, high fever and rash, swept through the valley of
Xiaowangqing. I, too, fell ill and was confined to my bed in
Shiliping. I learnt later that this illness was an eruptive typhus.
The younger generation nowadays does not know what this
disease is like, for they live in a land which has long been free of
epidemics.
But when we were waging the armed struggle in the mountains
60 years ago, the people in the guerrilla zone went through untold
suffering from epidemics. Since thousands of people lived in the
relatively small valley, epidemics of various kinds would break
out. The enemy’s “punitive” forces would attack frequently,
creating havoc as they pursued people from hill to hill, so we could
not improve the unsanitary conditions and take appropriate
measures to prevent epidemics, even though we wished to. All we
could do was to stretch a straw rope across the gate of the house of
people who had been affected or paste a warning notice on the
276
wall: “Off limits. An epidemic site.”
This was the worst possible trial for us–an epidemic raged at the
same time as the enemy hurled thousands of troops against us day
in and day out, in a do-or-die attempt to eliminate the guerrilla
zone. To make matters worse, I was ill and many of the leadership
were pale with worry over the fate of the guerrilla zone.
They sent a platoon leader, Kim Thaek Gun, together with his
wife and about a platoon of soldiers to guard and attend to me.
When the other units went out to fight, these guerrillas remained
behind to defend Shiliping. Mr. and Mrs. Kim had been living in
Yehe in north Manchuria and had moved to Wangqing by way of
Muling, determined to participate in the revolutionary struggle in
east Manchuria.
In addition, Choe Kum Suk, the Wangqing county party
committee member for women’s work, stayed in Shiliping, on
assignment from the party committee to nurse me.
At first I received medical care in the front room of the house of
a woman called Chun Ja. Her husband, Kim Kwon Il, had been the
secretary of a district party committee and later worked as the
secretary of the county party committee.
Whenever the enemy attacked the guerrilla zone, Kim Thaek
Gun would carry me on his back from valley to valley to seek
shelter.
As the enemy’s “punitive” operations intensified, they carried
me deep into a valley in Shiliping along a water course, and built a
hut for my shelter under a huge steep rock, difficult for the enemy
277
to assault. One could only approach it by means of a rope hanging
down the rock. Here I recovered completely thanks to the
ministrations of the three people tending me.
These unforgettable individuals snatched me from the jaws of
death. But for their diligent nursing, I would not have survived in
the valley of Shiliping. I was so ill that I lost consciousness several
times. I was told later that each time I slipped into a coma, they
would shed tears, and cried, “For goodness’ sake, pull yourself
together. What shall we do if you are so ill?” And when Kim
Thaek Gun was out looking for provisions, Choe Kum Suk would
support me as we wandered in search of a shelter. It is no
exaggeration to say that I only recovered thanks to her help.
I had received much assistance from Choe since the early days
after my arrival at Wangqing. When I had arrived at Macun from
the campaign in north and south Manchuria, she was the member
of the party committee of district No. 2, Dawangqing, for women’s
work. At that time Ri Sin Gun had been in charge of the women’s
association of the county. Whenever Choe came to Ri to discuss
their work, I would often see her at Ri Chi Baek’s house. They
were on intimate terms, as close as sisters. Ri Sin Gun praised her
greatly for having a fast hand at writing, to which I paid no heed at
first. I simply wondered how fast she could write. But I was
surprised when I saw the minutes of a meeting she had taken. The
contents of the speeches delivered at the meeting had been
recorded in full. Modern stenographers are said to write fast, but I
have not seen one who could compare to her. She could file away
278
all the discussions we had in a single night. We let her record the
proceedings of important meetings.
She was as magnanimous as a man and warm-hearted; and at
the same time, she was a woman of principle, faithful to the
revolution. She would have hauled a boat over a sandy beach if I
had asked her to do it. I sent her to the enemy-controlled areas on
several occasions on various missions, and she worked efficiently
there.
As a woman, she sympathized very much with me for having
lost my parents. She took the same loving care of me she would
have taken of her own younger brother, and I called her “sister.”
She would visit me before anybody else whenever I returned from
the battlefield, slipping into my hands something she felt I needed.
Sometimes she would sew up tears in my clothes and knit wool
into underwear for me. If she did not come to Lishugou for a long
time, I would go to see her. We were so much like brother and
sister that we would laugh and joke when we met. When she met
old people in the village, she would address them in the dialect of
Hamgyong Province. The words she used were funny and her
intonation was even more interesting. Even when I mimicked the
way she spoke and carried the joke too far, she did not get angry,
but simply smiled. But broad-minded as she was, she would not
accept jokes about her being pretty.
If I said she was a beauty she would explode, saying that I was
making fun of her. I enjoyed it when she pounded me on the back
with her fists, so I would joke and call her a beauty in spite of her
279
awkward feelings. In fact she had a cherubic face, though she was
not a woman of great beauty. But to me, women such as Choe
Kum Suk in the guerrilla zone were much nobler and prettier than
the girls and ladies in the big towns. I thought no women in the
world were more beautiful than those in the guerrilla zone. Even
though they lived year in and year out among powder fumes,
without once making up their faces, they did not complain nor
became bitter; they simply devoted themselves to the revolution. I
thought they were most beautiful. No doubt it was this attitude of
mine that led me to call Choe Kum Suk a pretty girl. In those days
I would spare nothing to make the women in the guerrilla zone
look much more beautiful.
We often found face powder, cream and other cosmetics among
the trophies we had captured. At first, when they saw these
articles, our guerrillas would throw them into a stream or trample
on them, saying that they were things used to make the faces of
Japanese jades beautiful. For some time I did not interfere in the
way the aromatic, high-quality trophies were disposed of. For I
thought they were useless. Our women in the guerrilla zone did not
paint their faces in those days. They all shared the view that to
smell of face powder or perfume was a sin. Some women made up
their faces once in a long while on holidays, but when they came
to gatherings, they would take seats in the back corners, feeling
sensitive to the others’ views. I regretted this. I thought it painful
that they should live a hard life with their faces stained with soot
and ashes, smelling of powder fumes all the year round and not
280
making up their faces even once. So I said to the guerrillas, “None
of us must throw away cosmetics from now on. We have women
among us, our women in the guerrilla zone. Where on earth are
there women more wonderful than our woman guerrillas and
women’s association members?”
The soldiers replied in one voice, “You are right. There are no
women in the world more wonderful than our women in the
guerrilla zone. They did not go to the enemy-controlled area, but
have shared their lives with the guerrillas for a year and a half,
even though they are bereaved of husbands, children and lovers by
the ‘punitive’ atrocities, live on herb roots and tree bark and shiver
with cold out in the open in unlined clothes in the dead of winter.
We feel ashamed and regret that we Korean men have not made it
possible for them to dress in silks and paint their faces with rouge
and lipstick so that they could show themselves off to the world.
Let us send them all the best things we have captured, even though
we don’t eat enough and are poorly-clothed. Let us allow them to
powder their faces if there are cosmetics.”
One day we captured cosmetics from the enemy and took them
to Choe Kum Suk to give to the women’s association members.
She was tremendously excited at the sight of a bundle of
cosmetics. From that day the smell of face powder began to hang
in the air in the Xiaowangqing guerrilla zone. When I went to a
club to enjoy a performance of the children’s art troupe on one
holiday, I could smell face powder and cream there.
Only Choe Kum Suk did not make herself up even after several
281
days had passed. I was concerned, and I asked her why she did not.
She only smiled instead of answering. There seemed to be some
reasons I did not know. So I asked Ri Sin Gun what the reason
was, and was told that Choe had given her share of cosmetics to a
women’s association member in Shiliping.
Later, we attacked the enemy behind his lines and again
captured plentiful cosmetics. I gave some of them to Choe Kum
Suk, saying that she should not give them to others this time, but
make up her own face, for I wished to see her face powdered. She
promised me that she would do this in gratitude to me for
capturing the cosmetics at the risk of my life.
A few days later on my way to Shiliping to give guidance to the
work of Choe Chun Guk’s company, I saw Choe Kum Suk, the
head of the women’s association of Dawangqing, sitting looking
very smart at the edge of the River Dawangqing, looking down at
the water with her back turned to the road. I got my orderly, Ri
Song Rim, to inquire why she was there. From a distance I saw the
orderly approach and salute her. Then, all of a sudden he split his
sides with laughter for some reason. Curious, I walked over to
them quickly. No sooner did I reach the edge of the stream than Ri
stopped laughing and pointed at Choe’s face with his finger,
“Comrade Commander, look at her face.”
I could not help smiling myself. Her clean, good-looking face
was spottily painted with rouge and cream. But Choe only looked
up at us without understanding what was the matter.
“Your face has become a world map, auntie,” Ri said.
282
“Oh, my!” Choe Kum Suk exclaimed, and she plumped down
and began to splash water on her face. Clumsy painting is no cause
for guilt or shame, but she was totally at a loss, as though she had
done something shameful. On a laundry stone close by I saw a
puff-box and cream case I had sent to her a few days before.
I realized she had no skill at making-up and was very clumsy at
it. But how could I make fun of that? She was making up her face
for the first time in her life. Worse still, she had no hand mirror. So
she had carefully put rouge and cream on her face as she looked
down at her reflection in the water. It was neither surprising nor
funny that she painted her face like a map of the world.
As Ri Song Rim approached her to tease her once again, I
waved my hand to check him. If he had said a few words more at
that time, she would have broken into tears and fled.
I am sure that women who make their faces up with highquality toilet articles in front of full-length mirrors or at dressingtables with triple mirrors every morning, will sympathize with
Choe Kum Suk when they read this part. I have heard that
nowadays it is the fashion for girls who get married to take a
dressing-table with triple mirrors with them among their personal
belongings. This is material proof that our women wish to make
their life more abundant and civilized.
But in those days when we had to eat gruel mixed with
vegetables and lie out on the frozen earth, fighting desperate
battles to defend the guerrilla zone, only a few of the women in
Xiaowangqing had hand mirrors, and they could never dream of
283
dressing-tables. So they went to the riverside, as Choe Kum
Suk did, if they wanted to make themselves up.
That day I did not reproach Ri Song Rim for ridiculing Choe’s
make-up skill, but I chided myself for not having paid attention to
obtaining mirrors for the women in the guerrilla zone. Our
sympathy for them was nothing when compared to the affection
they had for us. Our love for the people could in no way surpass
the infinite affection with which they had supported us and
attended on us.
This was the case with Choe Kum Suk. She nursed me all the
time with a warm affection and sincerity worth many times more
than the confidence I had placed in her. When my illness took a
turn for the better, she ran to Tumen 25 miles away before going
anywhere else. Tumen was a trading centre for a range of Korean
produce. She bought a bundle of Korean pears and apples there
and returned to Shiliping.
I was moved to tears to see them. I even suffered from the
hallucination that my mother in the world beyond had transformed
herself into Choe Kum Suk and was giving me her love. It was
indeed a love that only one’s own mother or sister could give.
Inhaling deeply the fragrance of the fruits of my motherland
which she had put in my hand, I said, full of gratitude, “Sister, how
can I repay your kindness?”
“What kindness? If you are so eager to return it, then take me
round the sights of Pyongyang after the liberation. I have heard
Pyongyang is the most beautiful place in the world.” Her reply was
284
half serious and half joking and yet somehow very earnest.
“Never mind. I am sure I can make your wish come true.
Neither of us must be killed, but fight on in order to set our feet on
the soil of Pyongyang when the motherland is liberated, sister.”
“I shall not die. But I always feel uneasy for you, for you don’t
take care of yourself.”
In order to tempt my appetite she obtained some sesame
pounded in a mortar and mixed it into my dishes and gruel. She
took pains to serve me with delicious fatty foods, saying that I had
fallen seriously ill through lack of nourishment. She made the
utmost effort, but everything was scarce or running short at that
time.
Kim Thaek Gun caught minnow in a stream and boiled them in
soy sauce or broiled them to feed me. He would catch 70 or 80 of
minnow a day. He was not only enthusiastic, but very skilful at
fishing.
Ashamed of serving only those fish at every meal, Choe went to
the village and got noodles. To the guerrillas who inquired after
my health, she said, “The Commander must recover as soon as
possible, but the trouble is that there is nothing to feed him, it
upsets me to prepare his meal everyday from the fish caught by
Thaek Gun, but the Commander says he enjoys eating them.”
On hearing this, those members of my unit who were masterhands at fishing caught a sackful of fish with dragnet one day and
came to visit me. Choe Kum Suk prepared it in various ways and
produced a dish for every meal. When I got a little better, she told
285
me I had continually called out the name of a woman she did not
know when I had been in a coma and she mimicked it; it was a
joke she had invented with Kim Thaek Gun’s wife. It was quite
absurd, but I was convulsed with laughter for the first time since I
had fallen ill. Looking back upon it now, I see it was laughter
through tears. I was well aware of that they were playing the fool
in order to cheer me up after being bedridden for so long.
Choe Kum Suk’s care of me even included telling me a false
date to prevent me going back to Macun before I recovered
completely. Whenever I came round from a coma, I asked her how
long I had been unconscious, and each time she would reduce the
real period. For instance, if I had been in a coma for two days, she
said it was two hours and if it had been five days, she would say
five hours. After recovering completely, I added up the days from
what she had told me and thought that only ten days had passed
since I fell ill. I felt quite relieved to hear that.
The lie she had told me was exposed when Choe Chun Guk
came to visit me. This honest political instructor could never tell a
lie. He told me that I had been bed-bound for a month. She
reproved innocent Choe Chun Guk for his tactlessness, but I
immediately gathered myself and returned to Macun.
A mountain of information was awaiting me at headquarters.
The data illustrated various aspects of the Japanese imperialists’
moves to bring Jiandao under their rule.
During the month I had been ill, the enemy had completed
the preparations for winter “punitive” operations. High-ranking
286
officials dispatched from the Japanese Cabinet had come to
Jiandao and reached a final decision on the plan for winter
“punitive” operations against the guerrilla bases in east
Manchuria, after discussing the matter with the brains of the
army, gendarmerie, police and diplomats in the field. The issue
had even been discussed at a Cabinet meeting in Tokyo.
At meetings the Japanese imperialists held to discuss the
problem of Manchuria, they claimed that “Operations for public
peace in Manchuria must begin with Jiandao!” They asserted that
the conquest of Jiandao was inseparably linked not only with the
great cause of building up the puppet Kingdom of Manchukuo but
with the security of the frontier of the Empire of Japan; its
conquest was therefore a matter of great urgency for the sake of
Manchukuo as well as of Japan herself. They also alleged that this
campaign should be blessed for the sake of the future of the great
Kingdom of Manchukuo and that the commander of the Kwantung
Army, whose mission it was to invade the Soviet Union, should
supervise the police institutions in Manchuria and that its provost
marshal, charged with the control of the army, be in the forefront
of the conquest of Jiandao.
After rigging up Manchukuo the Japanese imperialists had
adopted several important measures to maintain public peace in the
area. They committed a division of the Kwantung Army to
“punitive” operations as a replacement for the Jiandao task force,
established an armed constabulary in each county, and established
a secret service, judiciary police and industrial police; in this way
287
they made the police structure three-dimensional and expanded it
on a large scale.
Associations for the maintenance of public peace were
organized throughout Manchuria as joint consultative organs of
Japan and Manchukuo for the liquidation of insurgents and the
pacification of public opinion. Each province and county was a
unit, in addition to the centre; furthermore, various spy
organizations emerged and stretched out their tentacles towards the
communist camp. Through the introduction of the collective
security system which had existed in China in the old days and
which had proved effective for Japan in the maintenance of public
order in Taiwan and Kwantung area, the Japanese and Manchukuo
police bound the people hand and foot. Large-scale colonization
by armed Japanese immigrants who were reserve soldiers and the
expansion of the self-defence corps forces helped to check the antiManchukuo, anti-Japanese forces which had deep roots in the three
provinces of northeast China. The Japanese imperialists
empowered local secret-service policemen engaged in the work
with rebels to execute them on the spot.
All of these measures showed what painstaking efforts the
Japanese imperialists had exerted to dominate and retain the
colony of Manchukuo. A particular headache for them was the
armed struggle in the Jiandao area, waged by Korean communists
who struck at the face and back of the Empire in the northeastern
corner of China, and the full-scale national liberation movement of
which this struggle was a mainstay. It was no exaggeration when a
288
Japanese provost marshal said that the conquest of Jiandao would
be 90 per cent achieved if the Korean communists’ activities were
suppressed. The so-called great Empire of Japan was so afraid of
the Anti-Japanese People’s Guerrilla Army and the guerrilla zones,
its strongpoints. The Japanese imperialists therefore made frenzied
attempts to eliminate the anti-Japanese guerrilla zones in east
Manchuria at any cost.
In the summer of 1933 the military authorities of Japan recalled
to Korea part of the Jiandao task force which had suffered heavy
casualties from the attacks of the AJPGA and dispatched in its
place the Hitomi unit and many other crack troops of the
Kwantung Army to various parts of east Manchuria. The main
forces of their occupation army in Korea were concentrated in the
northern frontier region of our country, so that they could be
promptly committed to “mopping-up” operations in the guerrilla
zones. Large armed forces–over ten thousand men in all–encircled
the guerrilla zones in Jiandao and began winter “punitive”
operations.
Directing his main effort to the Xiaowangqing guerrilla zone,
where the General Staff of the Korean revolution was situated, the
enemy hurled against this area forces of 5,000 men from the
Kwantung Army, the puppet Manchukuo army, the police and selfdefence corps. The density of the enemy’s troop dispositions in
this battle has never been surpassed in any war except the wars of
pre-modern days in which the belligerent armies contended for
victory in square formation, and the battle fought in Lushun (Port
289
Arthur) during the Russo-Japanese War, since the advent of
skirmish-line warfare. The enemy even put his air force on alert.
Special detective teams supervised by the Jiandao secret service
were also dispatched to the areas surrounding the guerrilla zones.
Thus the whole region of east Manchuria became the field of
the most fierce and bloody battle between the Japanese imperialists
and the Korean communists. It was more a final showdown than a
battle for the defence of a few guerrilla zones.
The guerrilla forces in Xiaowangqing were only two
companies. Worse still, food reserves were low there. The guerrilla
bases in east Manchuria found themselves in a critical situation
that threatened their very existence. No one in the guerrilla zone
was optimistic enough to believe that the two companies could
defeat the powerful enemy armed with guns and aircraft. We were
caught between two alternatives–fighting to the last man or
abandoning the guerrilla zone and surrendering to the enemy. We
chose to fight to the last.
According to the principles of guerrilla tactics, the best thing to
do was to avoid a showdown. But if we did not fight, the enemy
would swallow up the guerrilla zones on the Tuman River in a
single gulp. If we did not defend these zones the revolutionary
masses who had been enjoying genuine equality and freedom
under the care of the people’s revolutionary government would be
frozen, starved and shot to death in the dead of winter.
Furthermore, the people would no longer look up to us.
The autumn scenery of Wangqing was magnificent, but it was
290
about to be ruined by the furious storm of the winter “puntive”
operations. All of the guerrilla zones turned to us in tense
anticipation. The people’s countenances brightened or clouded
depending on the soldiers’ expressions.
I began to look for some ingenious scheme, but none occurred
to my mind. There was no man at my side with whom I could
discuss tactical problems. Pak Hun, a graduate from the Huangpu
Military Academy, was absent; Kim Myong Gyun, xiaogezi (little
man–Tr.), who had served in the Soviet army for some years, and
Ri Ung Gol, a graduate from a military academy of the
Independence Army, had disappeared after being accused of being
members of the “Minsaengdan.”
Ryang Song Ryong, too, had fallen a prey to the
“Minsaengdan” nonsense.
I even thought how happy I would be if such a famous general
as Hong Pom Do was with us. Hong was a Righteous Volunteers’
Army general who had won a brilliant repute on the soil of
Wangqing. The brilliant victories the Independence Army had won
at Qingshanli and Fengwugou could be said to be the brainchild of
Hong Pom Do. Some people belittled him by saying that he was a
general who fought with an intuitive knack, without any strategy,
but that was nonsense. What they had described as a knack was in
the final analysis the product of strategic genius.
When he was alive, my father often said that Hong Pom Do was
a man of remarkable resources. Had he not been a resourceful
man, he would not have dealt such a telling blow to the Japanese
291
army on the Gaoli Pass by employing skilful ambushes so cleverly
and prudently. Those who could not discern the intelligence
concealed beneath his woodcutter’s appearance, should not have
claimed that they knew him. Many years had passed since this
commander-in-chief of the Korean Independence Army, who once
had had the area around Haerbaling under his thumb, concealed his
whereabouts. His image seemed to be fading from the people’s
memory with the passage of time. My distressed mind was
tormented by a yearning for help from my forerunners.
As I was struggling day in and day out with the problem of
strategy in the log-cabin of the headquarters, the old man Ri Chi
Baek called on me with a pot of honey one midnight.
Holding out the pot to me, he said, “I am sorry that I did not
give you anything when you were suffering from fever. Please take
this honey to help you recover.”
“Wild honey is worth its weight in gold. You did wonders to
obtain it.”
“Old man Ma who lives at the entrance of Hwanggarigol got it.
A few days ago he boasted that he had collected some wild honey,
so I went to see him. He gave me the whole pot, saying he would
sell even his house to obtain anything that was helpful to your
health. I am on my way back from his house now.”
I felt my heart overflow with gratitude for their consideration.
“Thank you very much, but I am young. You should take this
honey.”
“Please do not decline the kindness of old man. I have suffered
292
constant regret for not nursing you. You look haggard beyond
description, Commander.”
He pulled at my sleeve, suggesting that we take pot luck at his
house. I followed him without objecting. A meal with him was
welcome, but I was more interested in spending a night in the
house still scented by the presence of Pan. Even though I had
moved my lodging, I left a large share of my affection with the
generous, kind-hearted family who had taken care of me as
warmly as if I was their own son.
We ate corn gruel mixed with kidney beans and pumpkin as a
midnight snack. The food tasted sweet, perhaps because I had just
recovered from my febrile disease. The hostess, Mrs. So Song
Nyo, was well aware of my likes and dislikes in food. The most
notable food she used to treat me to was potato and maize roast.
The potatoes in the Jiandao area were large and the year-old ones
contained a lot of sugar. Such roasted potatoes with turnip pickle
soup tasted wonderful on a day when it was snowing heavily.
After the snack I lay beside the old man in the room where Pan
had stayed.
The old man could not sleep for some reason; he kept sighing
continually. I thought he was yearning for his son who had passed
away a few months before. His son, Ri Min Gwon, had been
severely wounded in an attempt to disarm Guan’s unit when it was
about to surrender to the enemy in the spring of 1933; he had died
while undergoing treatment in a hospital in Qiuyuegou. I myself
participated in the ceremony held in the memory of Ri Min Gwon.
293
In September 1932, a memorial service for the guerrilla, Choe Yun
Sik, was held in this house.
“Why do you keep sighing all night long, father?”I asked him,
pushing aside the quilt and turning round on the bed to face him.
“I cannot go to sleep. How can I sleep in peace when I have
heard that thousands of the enemy are encamped at the entrance to
the guerrilla zone? They say that the guerrilla army will be crushed
in this ‘mopping-up’ operation. What do you think, Commander?”
“It is a false rumour spread by the reactionaries. But if we don’t
make full preparations, the guerrilla zone will collapse in two or
three days. Frankly speaking, the destiny of the guerrilla zone is
hanging in the balance. So I cannot sleep, either.”
“It makes no sense for the guerrilla zone to be destroyed. How
can we live without this zone? We would rather kiss the dust or
give up the ghost.”
“You are quite right. If we are to die, then we must fall in this
guerrilla zone. But what should we do? The enemy numbers
thousands, and our army defending Xiaowangqing is no more than
one hundredth of the size of the enemy.”
The old man puffed nervously at a cigarette and spoke in a
serious tone of voice, pushing his pillow in front of my face, “If
you are short of soldiers, I will become one for you. There are
quite a few old men like me in Xiaowangqing who know how to
fire a rifle. They will be able to fight much better than the
Kanghwajin guard corps if each of them is given a rifle. I think
there are rifles and ammunition that the Independence Army
294
soldiers buried somewhere near Zhongqingli where we lived
before. If you can find them, you can surely arm the hunters and
the old men who were Independence Army soldiers in the old days
as well as the young people like my son-in-law, Jung Gwon, who
is busy with some kind of youth work. Everyone should become a
fighter and fight to the death fight. If we have no rifles, we must
defend the guerrilla zone by clutching the enemy’s throat and
giving him a belly throw.”
At the time when I was in despair over the disparity between
our forces and the enemy’s, his remark suggested to me that the
only way out of the impending difficulties was an all-people
resistance. I felt confident that we could seize the initiative in the
fight if we fought a death-defying struggle in every quarter, by
enlisting not only such paramilitary organizations as the selfdefence corps and the Children’s Vanguard, which I had intended
to use to man the front line with the guerrilla army, but also the
unarmed people. The defensive battle at Xiaowangqing would
have to be a battle between the enemy’s army and every soldier
and civilian in the guerrilla zone, rather than a battle between the
enemy’s army and the anti-Japanese guerrilla army. We could also
count on the support of the people from the semi-guerrilla zone.
This talk with Ri Chi Baek encouraged me. I thought, “He is
right. When the people say they will fight and they can win, they
mean what they say. Victory in war depends on the will of the
people and on how efficiently one enlists them.”
Thus I received my first inspiration while listening to the calm
295
voice of an old man who represented the opinion of thousands of
people in the Wangqing guerrilla zone. The plan of operations we
were mapping out had without fail to contain the people’s will as
expressed by the old man Ri.
I resolved that the defensive battle we were going to wage at
Xiaowangqing should be made an all-out fight fought by all the
people, young and old, men and women, in the guerrilla zone. This
definition of all-out resistance was an expression of our supreme
confidence in the people in the guerrilla zone, who had been
sharing life and death, weal and woe, with the army for the past
two years. The significant period for which fighting itself had been
our routine in the guerrilla zone allowed me to feel such
confidence. The guerrilla zones could not have remained strong for
two years after their establishment through the efforts of the army
alone. One factor was the efforts of the people, who had played a
considerable part in building up the army and defending the
guerrilla zones. When we fought a hard battle with the enemy, who
was ten or a hundred times stronger than us, we felt strong when
we had the people in our rear. When we sensed their breath as they
ran along the trenches, bringing hot water and rice balls, our
combat efficiency increased a thousand times.
This faith in the people’s strength underlay my decision to fight
an all-out battle and my plan of battle. This determination
conformed to the people’s will to become an integral whole with
the army under all circumstances and their determination to live in
the guerrilla base, if they were to live, and die there if they were to
296
die. An all-out effort by the people, when enlisted, would be a
formidable force.
This was the reserve force of the guerrilla army suggested by
the old man, Ri Chi Baek. But in fact the people of the guerrilla
base were not a mere reserve force; they were a most reliable
component of the main force.
We reaffirmed the tactical principles of attacking and
destroying dispersed enemy forces by concentrated initiatives and
of dispersing and harassing the enemy behind his lines when he
came under attack from concentrated forces. We then called on all
the people in Xiaowangqing to offer all-out resistance.
In response to the appeal, all the organizations and social strata
turned out as one for the preparations for the decisive battle. The
self-defence corps and young volunteers’ corps advanced to the
defensive position together with the guerrilla army and the young
and middle-aged men without weapons piled up rock barricades on
the steep heights along the line of defence. The famous hunters
Jang, Choe, Ri and others from Wangqing came to Macun, formed
a hunters’ corps with the veterans of the Independence Army, and
then took the field. The women’s stretcher teams and cooking units
also went on the alert. Children set spiked wooden planks in the
roads along which the enemy’s convoy was expected. The infirm
and small children were evacuated to safe places.
We made full preparations for the fight in the determination not
to follow in the footsteps of the Independence Army under the
northern political and military administration, which had fled,
297
deserting Wangqing. We would rather fall in battle.
Wangqing had witnessed not only the victory at Fengwugou but
also the bitter grief of the ignominious defeat suffered by the
Independence Army under the northern political and military
administration which retreated, leaving its compatriots to suffer
unspeakable “punitive” atrocities.
In south Manchuria there had been an Independence Army
organization called the western political and military
administration; there had also been the northern political and
military administration in the area around Xidapo, Wangqing
County, in east Manchuria, which was expanding the area under its
military influence with So Il as its president and Kim Jwa Jin as its
commander-in-chief. It was said that the patriotic fighters affiliated
with the administration numbered 500, and the organization had
had one million rounds of ammunition as well as funds amounting
to 100,000 yuan. The cadet-training school (military academy) run
by the organization in Shiliping had been a considerable size; it
could accept more than 400 cadets. The processions of animaldrawn convoys carrying supplies of straw sandals and provisions
contributed by the peasants in Wangqing and its vicinity to the
political-military administration used to stretch back as far as
Xidapo. This army, in cooperation with the Korean Independence
Army of Hong Pom Do, had once annihilated a large force of the
Japanese aggressors’ army at Qingshanli.
When Kim Jwa Jin, in grey serge uniform, with a sword at his
side, passed by on his white horse with bluish mane, the people in
298
Wangqing, men and women, young and old, used to bow deeply,
as if they were greeting the cortege of the Prime Minister or the
King of feudal Korea. They did this to express their gratitude to
the Independence Army for the victory at Qingshanli. But at the
news of the imminent massive “punitive” attack on Jiandao by the
Japanese army, the renowned General Kim Jwa Jin and his men
had vanished, without offering the slightest resistance. Unaware of
this, the Wangqing people had gone out on the road to have a look
at the commander-in-chief, Kim Jwa Jin.
Only one company remained. For some reason this company
had attended the graduation ceremony at the Tongil School just
prior to the “clean-up” of Jiandao. In accordance with custom the
school had prepared a sumptuous feast for the grand graduation
ceremony. As soon as the ceremony was over, the soldiers had
given three hasty cheers for independence, sat at the table and
wolfed down unrefined liquor, rice cakes, cold noodles and other
food. When the “punitive” forces arrived, they all fled. The pupils
and their parents, too, had scattered in all directions. The scene
was said to have been like a disturbed anthill. The “punitive”
forces had shot, bayoneted, and slashed with swords the
defenceless people who were running helter-skelter for their lives.
The Independence Army under the northern political and military
administration had been routed. The people in Wangqing lamented
over the sudden ruin of the army which had seemed so impressive.
If such a tragic event were to recur in the land of Wangqing,
where power was in the hands of the people, we would not have
299
the face to claim that we were the sons and daughters of Korea.
We decided to strike at the enemy by employing elusive
tactics–ambush, allurement, surprise attack and night storming–as
guerrilla warfare required. We had evolved these guerrilla tactics
ourselves in the course of defending the guerrilla zone from the
enemy’s repeated “punitive” offensives.
In the early days, when the Korean communists defined
guerrilla warfare as the basic form of armed struggle and began to
put it into effect, we had known practically nothing about tactics.
We could have referred to the experiences of others and their
manuals if they had been available, but we could not find them. So
we sent a man to the Soviet Union to obtain some reference
materials on war, including the combat experience of the Civil
War; they had been of some help to us in understanding the
concept of guerrilla struggle and the method of organizing
ambushes and surprise attacks, but they had not been suitable for
our actual situation.
As a first step to writing a manual of guerrilla warfare in our
own style, I finished writing a pamphlet after the battle at Jiapigou
at the end of March 1933. The pamphlet was titled Guerrilla
Actions, and it brought together the initial military experience we
had gained in our armed activities in the space of more than one
year.
The pamphlet dealt with fundamental matters, ranging from the
guerrillas’ spiritual and moral qualities to the general principles of
guerrilla warfare. It also codified all of the principles and methods,
300
ranging from the organization of guerrilla combat actions such as
raid, ambush, defensive battle, march and bivouac, to guerrilla
skills such as firing, handling weapons and discipline. Needless to
say, this was not a great book of military science such as Sun-tzu’s
Art of War or Clausewitz’s On War. But in the situation at that
time, when we had neither renowned military theoreticians nor
veterans of armed struggle, the pamphlet was a valuable handbook,
representing the simple theory of our own style of guerrilla
warfare. The officers and men of the guerrilla army studied it until
it became dog-eared from being carried in their rucksacks, and
they tried their best to apply the regulations specified in it to their
military practice.
Guerrilla Actions, together with the Guerrilla Manual which
was published later, provided prototypes for the establishment and
development of our revolutionary armed forces and Juche-based
tactics.
On November 17, 1933, the enemy attacked the Xiaowangqing
guerrilla zone from three directions in combined operations of
infantry, artillery and air force. The descendants of the Samurai
fell upon the guerrilla zone like angry wolves, growling and
threatening to bite at everything, even at the trees standing there.
These wild invaders seemed intent on swallowing up the land of
Wangqing at a single gulp.
The hordes of “punitive” troops crawled in waves over the
frozen ground, their aircraft continually bombing Macun and
Lishugou where the military and political headquarters were
301
located. The enemy’s tactics had become more brutal.
Previously, when frustrated in his attack he used to retreat to
his camp and then resume his onslaught. But now he did not
retreat even when his advance was checked, but stayed at the
point he had reached, consolidating the line he had established
before advancing again, step by step. Employing this
murderous tactic, he destroyed every life and burnt down
everything he came across.
However, our army and people heroically defended the guerrilla
base in unbreakable unity.
The fiercest of the battles was fought on Mt. Ppyojok and the
outpost in the Ssukpatgol on Mt. Mopan, the gateway to the
guerrilla zone. The 3rd company and the Anti-Japanese SelfDefence Corps manning these mountains mowed down the
attackers with a surprise barrage of gunfire, grenades and rocks
when the enemy had advanced to within 20 metres. The enemy
attacked tenaciously in waves, but failed to penetrate the line of
the outpost. The defenders on Mt. Mopan destroyed the enemy’s
highly mobile cavalry that was outflanking the defence at a bend
of the River Dawangqing.
As the enemy committed large forces in the successive waves
of attacks on Mts. Ppyojok and Mopan, we switched from an allout defensive to a war of attrition, employing flexible manoeuvres
mainly designed as enticements and feints, in combination with
positive defensive actions. This was a uniquely flexible tactic for
destroying the enemy forces continuously by employing a variety
302
of combat actions, and not allowing the enemy a moment’s
breathing space by constantly drawing him into engagement on our
own initiative. Had we clung to a stereotyped defence, and not
employed mobile tactics in good time, the guerrilla army would
have been routed by the enemy’s tenacious attacks based on
numerical and technical superiority.
In line with our new tactics, the guerrillas, along with the
members of the paramilitary organizations, withdrew from the
outposts; they lured the enemy deep into the defensive zone and
crushed him with constantly-switching tactics–ambush, sharpshooting, raiding the enemy’s campsites and burying bombs in the
bonfire.
Bombs could be buried in bonfires even by small boys, and the
effectiveness of the measure was assured. Whenever we moved
from one position to another we made sure that bombs were buried
in the bonfires. As soon as the enemy soldiers reached the deserted
position, they would gather around the campfires to warm
themselves. Then the bombs would explode, blowing up the
enemy. O Ryong Sok, the fourth younger brother of O Paek
Ryong, working with the women of the self-defence corps, killed
the enemy by this method at the central sentry post on Mt.
Ppyojok.
We also organized frequent night raids on the enemy’s camps.
Raiding parties of two to five guerrillas would infiltrate the
enemy’s position, scatter leaflets to disillusion the enemy forces
and fire a few shots before returning. Three or four shots fired at
303
the enemy’s tents or his campfires would transform his entire
camp into bedlam. Such raiding parties were sent three, four, and
even five times a night. The enemy soldiers were unable to sleep
all night; they trembled in fear and shot at random among
themselves. The enemy was so scared by our constant raids that
war lunatics began to appear among his ranks. Some enemy
soldiers surrendered to us after reading such leaflets as “Appeal to
the Japanese Soldiers!” and “Appeal to the Puppet Manchukuo
Army Soldiers!” scattered by the guerrillas.
Hunters armed with matchlock rifles, also fought. Though they
were old, their marksmanship was marvellous. Their admirable
skill in shooting only enemy officers could be compared to that of
modern snipers. The members of the women’s association rushed
to and from the trenches with rice balls and hot water on their
heads. Children until 10 years of age came to the battlefields and
beat drums and blew trumpets to boost the men’s morale.
A conspicuous feature of Operation Macun was the showers of
rock blocks from outpost positions, like those on Mt. Ppyojok.
These piles of rock would roar down upon the attacking “punitive”
forces, killing and wounding them en masse. The thunder of a
rock-slide down on the steep slope and the clouds of dust like
gunsmoke struck terror into the aggressors’ hearts. This method
also proved very effective in halting the advance of the enemy’s
cavalry, vehicles and artillery.
One of the heroes shown up by these battles was a guerrilla
with a nickname of “13 bullets.” He had been known in the
304
Wangqing area as an adventurous young man since the time when
he had captured rifles from a tax office on the Tuman River on
assignment from the YCL organization. When he arrived at the
office he had said, “How are you, panjandrums? I am a Korean
young man, a member of the Young Communist League.” He
introduced himself, then took out a revolver and took down three
rifles hanging on the wall without any great hurry. Then he rang up
the police station and shouted, “What are you doing over there?
There’s a communist here. Come over here quickly, all of you.”
The police station had hastily dispatched mounted policemen to
the site of the incident. He had returned, only narrowly escaping
being killed. He had repeated similar adventures afterwards. I do
not need to describe here the kind of criticism he received from the
YCL organization.
This young man performed a great feat at the post in the valley
of Ssukpatgol, a feat worthy of being recorded in the annals of the
anti-Japanese revolution. A ten-man blocking party had been
stationed at the post at all times. The head of that party was none
other than this young man, “13 bullets.” He was the platoon leader
and was also in charge of the YCL group in that party. A large
“punitive” force consisting of Japanese and puppet Manchukuo
soldiers and self-defence corps men, surrounded the valley under
cover of darkness one night and started attacking the post. The
blocking party was involved in heavy fighting from dawn. They
repelled the enemy’s charge seven times until one corner of the
log-cabin that was serving as a post had been burned down.
305
Calling a YCL group meeting in the thick of the battle, the young
man said, “Comrades, behind us is the guerrilla base and our
beloved brothers and sisters. If we fall back a single step from
here, we will have no right to live in this world as young Koreans.
Let us hold out to the last, even though it costs our lives, even
though our bodies are torn to pieces!”
The blocking party members, ablaze with hatred, fixed bayonets
to their rifles in order to fight hand to hand with the enemy. “13
bullets” was keen to fight in that way as well. But he calmed
himself, in order to carry out his assignment. This brave fighter,
who had been criticized for his self-opinionated attitude and
adventurism, had grown into a seasoned commanding officer who
could control and regulate himself in bloody battles.
When we reached the valley with reinforcements, he was lying
at the post with 13 shots in his body. Hence his nickname–“13
bullets.” Members of the blocking party had been wounded in
seven, three and two places. They were given the nicknames of
“seven bullets,” “three bullets” and “two bullets.”
The people in Wangqing called him “13 bullets” instead of his
real name. I also called him by his nickname. Eventually his real
name faded from the people’s memory. It is annoying that I cannot
remember his real name. But I draw comfort from the fact that the
nickname he earned in the anti-Japanese war will have a more
lingering effect on the minds of the readers than that his real name
would have.
The battle became heavier as the days went by. People were
306
evacuated from Xiaowangqing which had been reduced to ashes
by the gunfire of the Japanese army to Shiliping. The enemy killed
everybody who came into their sight–soldiers and civilians, young
and old, men and women. Hundreds of people were killed in
Xiaowangqing during the winter “punitive” operations. When we
were fighting in front of a lumber camp at Wucidao in Shiliping, a
Japanese army unit, which had passed a sentry post disguised as
refugees, fired a machinegun at the backs of people who were
moving from Macun to Dawangqing. This raid alone cost us scores
of casualties. The enemy surrounded the village of Duchuanping in
one night and killed all the sleeping people with volleys of
machinegun fire. The family of Paek Il Ryong, a secretary of a
district committee of the youth association who was a skilled
playwright, were all killed. A great number of children in
Xiaowangqing were killed during the “punitive” operations of that
year.
When the situation in the guerrilla zone was at its worst, the
refugees in the valley of Lishugou numbered more than 1,500. The
guerrillas went to indescribable lengths to evacuate them to
Dawangqing. Sometimes the procession of refugees moving to
Dawangqing would be cut to pieces by a surprise attack from the
enemy; then, they would wander about the woods the whole day
trying to find one another. At that time I covered the evacuation of
the revolutionary masses all day long, carrying babies in my arms.
Other guerrillas, too, helped the old and the sick, while carrying on
fighting. This heartbreaking picture was the initial point of unity
307
between our army and people of today. It was a picture painted in
blood and tears.
When I look back upon the scene of that day as we took the
refugees from Lishugou to Shiliping, I feel a lump rise in my
throat.
Many of the refugees had not eaten cereals for 20 days because
of the enemy’s “punitive” operation; they ate bean pods and dried
turnip leaves for their meals. In Shiliping for lack of cereals they
boiled cowhides and ate them.
If we show our younger generation the “foodstuffs” the people
in the guerrilla zone ate during those years when they were too
hungry to lift up their heads to see the sun in the sky, they will not
be able to hold back their tears at the subhuman starvation their
forerunners suffered.
Kim Myong Suk (from Yanji) lost her two children and she
herself came within an ace of death, for she had not yet recovered
from the period of spring food shortage before the barley harvest.
As she had not eaten anything for a whole week, she could not
think of burying her children outside, even though she saw them
starve to death with her own eyes; she lay in the hut without
moving, for she had no energy to sit up. Her neighbours came and
managed to pull the bodies of her dead
children away from the hut and bury them in fallen leaves; they,
too, had eaten nothing for a whole week and were too weak to dig
graves. When she ate boiled rice for the first time after her return
to her liberated motherland, Kim Myong Suk wept, recollecting
308
the spring famine in the guerrilla zone which deprived her of her
two children.
In the Chechangzi guerrilla base there was a man who, in the
battle at Yulangcun, had been wounded by eight machinegun
bullets, his skull being split open to reveal his brain, but had
miraculously survived. His tenacious grasp on life earned him the
nickname of “eight bullets.” Later he, too, died of starvation while
working in the government office at Dongnancha. On his
deathbed, he said, “If I had died when I was wounded eight times,
I could have been remembered as a hero. How lamentable it is to
die here of hunger!”
The enemy besieged the guerrilla zones and starved the people
to death or drove them out to freeze to death.
The Korean people endured unbearable trials in those years.
The sacrifices imposed upon them still rankle as unhealed wounds
in the heart of our nation.
The rulers of Japan are under a moral obligation to reflect upon
the crimes they have committed in Korea and Manchuria.
Repentance implies neither shame nor humiliation. It is a process
of self-reform by means of reason in the effort to approach
perfection. They may close their eyes, but time will never erase the
facts of history. Japan must remember that her high rate of growth,
the economic bed of roses in which she glorifies, is stained with
the blood of the Korean nation. Japan, also, has experienced a
national disaster in lives which were lost under foreign fire, and
her beloved daughters were raped by occupation troops, hasn’t
309
she?
In spite of the heavy losses he suffered having invaded the
guerrilla zone, the enemy tenaciously attempted to prolong the
battle in order to make us die of cold and hunger, by denying us
reinforcements and fresh supplies of weapons and provisions.
Effecting a decisive turn in the tide of battle was the only way
we could save the army and the people in the guerrilla zone.
Striking the enemy hard and harassing him behind his lines,
together with continued efforts to destroy him within the defensive
area was the only way we could save them.
Ever since my arrival in Wangqing, I had been opposed to the
tendency that had restricted us to the defence of the guerrilla zone.
In other words, my idea was to raid and destroy the enemy by
concentrating efforts when the enemy’s forces were dispersed, and
at the same time to disperse ourselves and harass the enemy in
many places behind his lines when he was already under
concentrated attack. This was called the tactic of avoiding the
enemy where he was strong and attacking him where he was weak.
Only then could we defend the guerrilla zone and preserve our
forces.
Most of the party cadres in the county and east Manchuria,
however, insisted that we should concentrate our efforts in defence
when the enemy was attacking us by massing his forces against the
guerrilla zone, to save the guerrilla zone and the people.
These differences in opinions regarding a tactical issue resulted
in a serious argument as to which of the opinions was in
310
accordance with Marxist principles. They contended that my
opinion was not an expression of Marxism but of escapism and
capitulationism, while I asserted the correctness of the tactic of
harassing the enemy behind his own lines.
I said that our forces, no matter how concentrated, would never
be equal to the enemy’s forces, so we should evacuate the
population, and leave only a part of the guerrilla force to shoot at
chosen points, while the rest of us should disperse and harass the
enemy from behind; for instance, ten guerrillas equipped with
rifles could take 30 or 40 unarmed young men with them to strike
at the enemy from behind at his weak points, then they would be
able to capture weapons and provisions.
Many comrades judged the situation correctly and supported
me.
But some bigots would not listen to me. Boasting of seniority
based on so-called activity, they said, “Young men should listen to
experienced people. How is it conceivable for the army to leave
the guerrilla zone when the enemy is falling upon us? This idea
means deserting the people in order to save the army.”
When the guerrilla zone had been reduced to ashes and many
people had been killed in a short space of time, I met Tong Changrong, Ri Sang Muk, Song Il and other cadres of the ad hoc
committee and county party committee, and insisted on conducting
harassing operations behind the enemy lines.
“Things have reached a dead end. If we go on in this way, not
only we, but also the people, will all be killed. Where can we
311
retreat? If we retreat deeper into the mountains as we are doing
now, there will be no houses and no food in the forest. Retreat will
get us nowhere. You seem to think that you and the guerrillas can
directly repulse the enemy, but that is hopeless. We should divide
the guerrilla army into three or four groups and send them into the
enemy-controlled area tonight. If we hit a few of the enemy’s
bases from behind, the ‘punitive’ forces will surely retreat from
Xiaowangqing.”
Hard battles were also being fought in other guerrilla zones in
east Manchuria. The people in Hunchun were driven towards
Jinchang and Huoshaopu, the people in Wangougou were driven
towards Dahuangwai and Sandaowan, and the people in Helong
towards Chechangzi. Even when things had come to this pass,
some of the leadership hesitated to make a decision.
So I asserted once again the idea of harassing the enemy from
behind and declared that I would fight according to my own
decision because the army was under my command. Then I
assembled the guerrillas and said, “We must not only hold on, but
strike the enemy from behind. Who will go to fight behind the
enemy lines? Any of you who will follow me, come along! I don’t
need many, only half of you, and the rest must stay here to protect
the people. Those who want to go with me, must break the siege
tonight. If we break through, we’ll survive. If we attack the enemy
bases and strongpoints one after another, the people will spread the
news. Then the ‘punitive’ forces which are attacking this valley
will fall back, afraid of being destroyed from behind.”
312
The guerrilla army was thus divided into two groups–one, under
the command of Choe Chun Guk, defended Shiliping, and the
other, under my command, went to the enemy-controlled area. The
YCL members evacuated 1,500 people from the guerrilla zone to
Luozigou.
We gave Choe Kum Suk the assignment of taking Tong Changrong, who was confined to his bed, towards Miaogou and nursing
him there, and put all our food reserve in her knapsack. That was
the last time I saw her.
That evening, in command of a detachment, I crawled through the
line of siege and penetrated deep into the enemy-held area. As we had
expected, the area behind the enemy lines was almost deserted. When
we entered a village near a certain town, the villagers were preparing
their feast for New Year’s Day. They said they thought everyone in
the guerrilla zone had been killed by the Japanese imperialist
“punitive” forces, and they were happy to see us; they treated us to
rich festive food like dumplings and millet cakes. That night Kim
Saeng Gil, a guerrilla of O Paek Ryong’s platoon, nearly died from a
belly-ache after eating 140 dumplings.
My men felt so tired the next morning that I posted a sentry and
let them sleep all day long. As they caught up on their sleep after
shivering in cold without proper food or rest for months, their
faces were radiant.
We began striking at the enemy the very next day. Our tactic
was to attack primarily the small bases of the “punitive” forces and
combine to attack considerably large bases.
313
We struck at the enemy first in Liangshuiquanzi, destroying a
puppet Manchukuo army unit and the self-defence corps, and then
fell upon the barracks of the Japanese consulate police. And then,
after a feinting manoeuvre far away from Liangshuiquanzi, we
again raided an enemy convoy of trucks at Xinnangou, capturing a
great amount of wheat flour and munitions. From there we slipped
away to the mountainous area of Beifengwudong and made
preparations for a new battle. On the night of February 16, 1934,
we eliminated most of the puppet Manchukuo army soldiers,
policemen and self-defence corps members in Beifengwudong,
and captured some of them.
After winning a victory there, we crossed the Beigaoli Pass and
advanced to Sidong; then we attacked the forest ranger base in
Tonggol, killing and capturing all the enemy at their barracks.
The final battle which made a decisive contribution to
frustrating the enemy’s winter “punitive” operations was fought at
Daduchuan, a site of strategic importance on the TumenMudanjiang railway. Disguised as a “punitive” force, we raced
over 25 miles of steep mountain pass by means of forced march,
divided our force into three groups, stormed the police station and
the quarters of the self-defence corps and set fire to the munitions
depot.
After this battle the enemy began to lift the siege of the guerrilla
zones and retreated to the position from which he had started 90
days before. He could not eliminate the “scourge.” The “punitive”
operations, which had threatened the very existence of the guerrilla
314
zones for three months, had failed.
The battle in defence of the Xiaowangqing guerrilla zone,
which for convenience’ sake was called Operation Macun, ended
in victory for us. This was a miraculous event which passed almost
unnoticed on the outskirts of a world preoccupied with the
assumption of office by Adolf Hitler, the trials at Leipzig and the
establishment of diplomatic relations between the Soviet Union
and the United States. I greatly regret not being able to describe in
vivid detail all the heroic efforts made by the defenders of the
Xiaowangqing guerrilla zone in the face of dire hardships.
We paid dearly for the victory. Hundreds of people lost their
lives under the gunfire of the enemy. The loss of Choe Kum Suk
and Tong Chang-rong caused me bitter pain. Among all the people
in the guerrilla zone who came running to greet us with tears on
their faces as we returned in triumph from behind the enemy lines,
I could not see Choe Kum Suk, who cared for me as lovingly as if
I were her own younger brother. The knapsack my orderly carried
for me contained a hand mirror I had obtained as a present for her.
There were also several sacks of trophies for the members of the
women’s association.
What harsh trials the members of the association had endured,
shedding bitter tears as they defended the guerrilla zone that
winter! How many meals they had cooked and how much root of
grass they had gathered! Two women, Hye Suk and Yong Suk,
lured the enemy who forced them to act as their guides to a place
where there were no guerrillas, and caused him many problems
315
before being killed. By shouting out that the enemy was coming,
Choe Chang Bom’s aunt lured towards her enemy troops who
were crawling up the cliff on which the guerrilla command post
was located. These were patriotic woman martyrs in the modern
war against the Japanese, just as Kye Wol Hyang6 and Ron Kae7
had been in the war against the Japanese invaders in the Middle
Ages.
My gift to beloved Choe Kum Suk had come too late. The
enemy had deprived of me the only woman I ever called “sister”
and felt so attached to in my whole life, the woman who used to
say she would not die and was more concerned for my safety than
her own when I said that both of us must fight on and live to see
the liberation of the motherland.
The death of Tong Chang-rong was also a heartbreaking loss to
me. He was one of the most unforgettable of the Chinese
comrades-in-arms who had taken loving care of me and respected
my ideas. We had frequently argued about important matters
concerning political lines. As he was somewhat obstinate, we had
now and then failed to reach an agreement, but such differences
had not affected our friendship. He had always respected me,
saying that I was the only man in whom he could place his trust
among the Koreans.
After the battle at Daduchuan we withdrew in the direction of
Yaoyinggou, and then returned to Macun, where we reviewed the
defence of the Xiaowangqing guerrilla zone. The people who had
returned from evacuation were building their houses on the ashes.
316
An old man told me he was building his house for the 70th time
since he came to the guerrilla zone–such was the vital energy of
the people in Jiandao who had decided to live in the guerrilla zone
no matter where, and die there should they have to die.
But for the assistance and support of such people, our guerrilla
army would not have succeeded in defeating the enemy’s largescale “punitive” operations. The victory of Operation Macun was
the result of unity between the army and people and of resistance
supported by all the people. The fighting spirit with which we
attacked the enemy in spite of all our disadvantages, as well as the
protean tactics which, supported by that spirit, we ourselves
evolved were the decisive factors in the victory of Operation
Macun.
Throughout the whole of Operation Macun the spirit of the
guerrilla zone was displayed, a spirit that had thrived and soared
aloft like giant trees on the soil of revolutionary power, on the
basis of the unbreakable will and mettle of our nation. This spirit
enabled us to defend every inch of Xiaowangqing with our blood,
with a strength which guns and planes were unable to conquer.
Operation Macun proved to be a brilliant military, political and
moral victory for our revolutionary army, enhancing its military
authority. In this battle we created a variety of new tactics, which
served as the backbone of future guerrilla tactics, and we laid the
organizational and tactical foundations for the switch to largeforce actions in the subsequent years. The Anti-Japanese People’s
Guerrilla Army acquired rich experience which enabled us to
317
repulse an enemy attack from any quarter.
Operation Macun ensured the successful defence of
Xiaowangqing, helped towards resolving the critical situation in
the guerrilla zones in the neighbouring counties, and made a great
contribution to promoting the overall Korean revolution centred on
the anti-Japanese armed struggle. The spirit of the heroic soldiers
who held out against the American invaders on Height 12118 in
the war in the 1950s was derived from the spirit of the guerrilla
zones in the 1930s. We still maintain this spirit as we advance
along the straight road of our own style of socialism within
imperialist encirclement.
No force in the world can ever break the spirit which was born
and tried in the flames of the anti-Japanese war. As long as they
possess this spirit, our army and our people will continue to
advance along the road of constant victory in the future.
318
5. Operation Macun
An epidemic of fever broke out in the guerrilla zone in the
autumn of that year. This acute disease, with the symptoms of
chill, high fever and rash, swept through the valley of
Xiaowangqing. I, too, fell ill and was confined to my bed in
Shiliping. I learnt later that this illness was an eruptive typhus.
The younger generation nowadays does not know what this
disease is like, for they live in a land which has long been free of
epidemics.
But when we were waging the armed struggle in the mountains
60 years ago, the people in the guerrilla zone went through untold
suffering from epidemics. Since thousands of people lived in the
relatively small valley, epidemics of various kinds would break
out. The enemy’s “punitive” forces would attack frequently,
creating havoc as they pursued people from hill to hill, so we could
not improve the unsanitary conditions and take appropriate
measures to prevent epidemics, even though we wished to. All we
could do was to stretch a straw rope across the gate of the house of
people who had been affected or paste a warning notice on the
319
wall: “Off limits. An epidemic site.”
This was the worst possible trial for us–an epidemic raged at the
same time as the enemy hurled thousands of troops against us day
in and day out, in a do-or-die attempt to eliminate the guerrilla
zone. To make matters worse, I was ill and many of the leadership
were pale with worry over the fate of the guerrilla zone.
They sent a platoon leader, Kim Thaek Gun, together with his
wife and about a platoon of soldiers to guard and attend to me.
When the other units went out to fight, these guerrillas remained
behind to defend Shiliping. Mr. and Mrs. Kim had been living in
Yehe in north Manchuria and had moved to Wangqing by way of
Muling, determined to participate in the revolutionary struggle in
east Manchuria.
In addition, Choe Kum Suk, the Wangqing county party
committee member for women’s work, stayed in Shiliping, on
assignment from the party committee to nurse me.
At first I received medical care in the front room of the house of
a woman called Chun Ja. Her husband, Kim Kwon Il, had been the
secretary of a district party committee and later worked as the
secretary of the county party committee.
Whenever the enemy attacked the guerrilla zone, Kim Thaek
Gun would carry me on his back from valley to valley to seek
shelter.
As the enemy’s “punitive” operations intensified, they carried
me deep into a valley in Shiliping along a water course, and built a
hut for my shelter under a huge steep rock, difficult for the enemy
320
to assault. One could only approach it by means of a rope hanging
down the rock. Here I recovered completely thanks to the
ministrations of the three people tending me.
These unforgettable individuals snatched me from the jaws of
death. But for their diligent nursing, I would not have survived in
the valley of Shiliping. I was so ill that I lost consciousness several
times. I was told later that each time I slipped into a coma, they
would shed tears, and cried, “For goodness’ sake, pull yourself
together. What shall we do if you are so ill?” And when Kim
Thaek Gun was out looking for provisions, Choe Kum Suk would
support me as we wandered in search of a shelter. It is no
exaggeration to say that I only recovered thanks to her help.
I had received much assistance from Choe since the early days
after my arrival at Wangqing. When I had arrived at Macun from
the campaign in north and south Manchuria, she was the member
of the party committee of district No. 2, Dawangqing, for women’s
work. At that time Ri Sin Gun had been in charge of the women’s
association of the county. Whenever Choe came to Ri to discuss
their work, I would often see her at Ri Chi Baek’s house. They
were on intimate terms, as close as sisters. Ri Sin Gun praised her
greatly for having a fast hand at writing, to which I paid no heed at
first. I simply wondered how fast she could write. But I was
surprised when I saw the minutes of a meeting she had taken. The
contents of the speeches delivered at the meeting had been
recorded in full. Modern stenographers are said to write fast, but I
have not seen one who could compare to her. She could file away
321
all the discussions we had in a single night. We let her record the
proceedings of important meetings.
She was as magnanimous as a man and warm-hearted; and at
the same time, she was a woman of principle, faithful to the
revolution. She would have hauled a boat over a sandy beach if I
had asked her to do it. I sent her to the enemy-controlled areas on
several occasions on various missions, and she worked efficiently
there.
As a woman, she sympathized very much with me for having
lost my parents. She took the same loving care of me she would
have taken of her own younger brother, and I called her “sister.”
She would visit me before anybody else whenever I returned from
the battlefield, slipping into my hands something she felt I needed.
Sometimes she would sew up tears in my clothes and knit wool
into underwear for me. If she did not come to Lishugou for a long
time, I would go to see her. We were so much like brother and
sister that we would laugh and joke when we met. When she met
old people in the village, she would address them in the dialect of
Hamgyong Province. The words she used were funny and her
intonation was even more interesting. Even when I mimicked the
way she spoke and carried the joke too far, she did not get angry,
but simply smiled. But broad-minded as she was, she would not
accept jokes about her being pretty.
If I said she was a beauty she would explode, saying that I was
making fun of her. I enjoyed it when she pounded me on the back
with her fists, so I would joke and call her a beauty in spite of her
322
awkward feelings. In fact she had a cherubic face, though she was
not a woman of great beauty. But to me, women such as Choe
Kum Suk in the guerrilla zone were much nobler and prettier than
the girls and ladies in the big towns. I thought no women in the
world were more beautiful than those in the guerrilla zone. Even
though they lived year in and year out among powder fumes,
without once making up their faces, they did not complain nor
became bitter; they simply devoted themselves to the revolution. I
thought they were most beautiful. No doubt it was this attitude of
mine that led me to call Choe Kum Suk a pretty girl. In those days
I would spare nothing to make the women in the guerrilla zone
look much more beautiful.
We often found face powder, cream and other cosmetics among
the trophies we had captured. At first, when they saw these
articles, our guerrillas would throw them into a stream or trample
on them, saying that they were things used to make the faces of
Japanese jades beautiful. For some time I did not interfere in the
way the aromatic, high-quality trophies were disposed of. For I
thought they were useless. Our women in the guerrilla zone did not
paint their faces in those days. They all shared the view that to
smell of face powder or perfume was a sin. Some women made up
their faces once in a long while on holidays, but when they came
to gatherings, they would take seats in the back corners, feeling
sensitive to the others’ views. I regretted this. I thought it painful
that they should live a hard life with their faces stained with soot
and ashes, smelling of powder fumes all the year round and not
323
making up their faces even once. So I said to the guerrillas, “None
of us must throw away cosmetics from now on. We have women
among us, our women in the guerrilla zone. Where on earth are
there women more wonderful than our woman guerrillas and
women’s association members?”
The soldiers replied in one voice, “You are right. There are no
women in the world more wonderful than our women in the
guerrilla zone. They did not go to the enemy-controlled area, but
have shared their lives with the guerrillas for a year and a half,
even though they are bereaved of husbands, children and lovers by
the ‘punitive’ atrocities, live on herb roots and tree bark and shiver
with cold out in the open in unlined clothes in the dead of winter.
We feel ashamed and regret that we Korean men have not made it
possible for them to dress in silks and paint their faces with rouge
and lipstick so that they could show themselves off to the world.
Let us send them all the best things we have captured, even though
we don’t eat enough and are poorly-clothed. Let us allow them to
powder their faces if there are cosmetics.”
One day we captured cosmetics from the enemy and took them
to Choe Kum Suk to give to the women’s association members.
She was tremendously excited at the sight of a bundle of
cosmetics. From that day the smell of face powder began to hang
in the air in the Xiaowangqing guerrilla zone. When I went to a
club to enjoy a performance of the children’s art troupe on one
holiday, I could smell face powder and cream there.
Only Choe Kum Suk did not make herself up even after several
324
days had passed. I was concerned, and I asked her why she did not.
She only smiled instead of answering. There seemed to be some
reasons I did not know. So I asked Ri Sin Gun what the reason
was, and was told that Choe had given her share of cosmetics to a
women’s association member in Shiliping.
Later, we attacked the enemy behind his lines and again
captured plentiful cosmetics. I gave some of them to Choe Kum
Suk, saying that she should not give them to others this time, but
make up her own face, for I wished to see her face powdered. She
promised me that she would do this in gratitude to me for
capturing the cosmetics at the risk of my life.
A few days later on my way to Shiliping to give guidance to the
work of Choe Chun Guk’s company, I saw Choe Kum Suk, the
head of the women’s association of Dawangqing, sitting looking
very smart at the edge of the River Dawangqing, looking down at
the water with her back turned to the road. I got my orderly, Ri
Song Rim, to inquire why she was there. From a distance I saw the
orderly approach and salute her. Then, all of a sudden he split his
sides with laughter for some reason. Curious, I walked over to
them quickly. No sooner did I reach the edge of the stream than Ri
stopped laughing and pointed at Choe’s face with his finger,
“Comrade Commander, look at her face.”
I could not help smiling myself. Her clean, good-looking face
was spottily painted with rouge and cream. But Choe only looked
up at us without understanding what was the matter.
“Your face has become a world map, auntie,” Ri said.
325
“Oh, my!” Choe Kum Suk exclaimed, and she plumped down
and began to splash water on her face. Clumsy painting is no cause
for guilt or shame, but she was totally at a loss, as though she had
done something shameful. On a laundry stone close by I saw a
puff-box and cream case I had sent to her a few days before.
I realized she had no skill at making-up and was very clumsy at
it. But how could I make fun of that? She was making up her face
for the first time in her life. Worse still, she had no hand mirror. So
she had carefully put rouge and cream on her face as she looked
down at her reflection in the water. It was neither surprising nor
funny that she painted her face like a map of the world.
As Ri Song Rim approached her to tease her once again, I
waved my hand to check him. If he had said a few words more at
that time, she would have broken into tears and fled.
I am sure that women who make their faces up with highquality toilet articles in front of full-length mirrors or at dressingtables with triple mirrors every morning, will sympathize with
Choe Kum Suk when they read this part. I have heard that
nowadays it is the fashion for girls who get married to take a
dressing-table with triple mirrors with them among their personal
belongings. This is material proof that our women wish to make
their life more abundant and civilized.
But in those days when we had to eat gruel mixed with
vegetables and lie out on the frozen earth, fighting desperate
battles to defend the guerrilla zone, only a few of the women in
Xiaowangqing had hand mirrors, and they could never dream of
326
dressing-tables. So they went to the riverside, as Choe Kum Suk
did, if they wanted to make themselves up.
That day I did not reproach Ri Song Rim for ridiculing Choe’s
make-up skill, but I chided myself for not having paid attention to
obtaining mirrors for the women in the guerrilla zone. Our
sympathy for them was nothing when compared to the affection
they had for us. Our love for the people could in no way surpass
the infinite affection with which they had supported us and
attended on us.
This was the case with Choe Kum Suk. She nursed me all the
time with a warm affection and sincerity worth many times more
than the confidence I had placed in her. When my illness took a
turn for the better, she ran to Tumen 25 miles away before going
anywhere else. Tumen was a trading centre for a range of Korean
produce. She bought a bundle of Korean pears and apples there
and returned to Shiliping.
I was moved to tears to see them. I even suffered from the
hallucination that my mother in the world beyond had transformed
herself into Choe Kum Suk and was giving me her love. It was
indeed a love that only one’s own mother or sister could give.
Inhaling deeply the fragrance of the fruits of my motherland
which she had put in my hand, I said, full of gratitude, “Sister, how
can I repay your kindness?”
“What kindness? If you are so eager to return it, then take me
round the sights of Pyongyang after the liberation. I have heard
Pyongyang is the most beautiful place in the world.” Her reply was
327
half serious and half joking and yet somehow very earnest.
“Never mind. I am sure I can make your wish come true.
Neither of us must be killed, but fight on in order to set our feet on
the soil of Pyongyang when the motherland is liberated, sister.”
“I shall not die. But I always feel uneasy for you, for you don’t
take care of yourself.”
In order to tempt my appetite she obtained some sesame
pounded in a mortar and mixed it into my dishes and gruel. She
took pains to serve me with delicious fatty foods, saying that I had
fallen seriously ill through lack of nourishment. She made the
utmost effort, but everything was scarce or running short at that
time.
Kim Thaek Gun caught minnow in a stream and boiled them in
soy sauce or broiled them to feed me. He would catch 70 or 80 of
minnow a day. He was not only enthusiastic, but very skilful at
fishing.
Ashamed of serving only those fish at every meal, Choe went to
the village and got noodles. To the guerrillas who inquired after
my health, she said, “The Commander must recover as soon as
possible, but the trouble is that there is nothing to feed him, it
upsets me to prepare his meal everyday from the fish caught by
Thaek Gun, but the Commander says he enjoys eating them.”
On hearing this, those members of my unit who were masterhands at fishing caught a sackful of fish with dragnet one day and
came to visit me. Choe Kum Suk prepared it in various ways and
produced a dish for every meal. When I got a little better, she told
328
me I had continually called out the name of a woman she did not
know when I had been in a coma and she mimicked it; it was a
joke she had invented with Kim Thaek Gun’s wife. It was quite
absurd, but I was convulsed with laughter for the first time since I
had fallen ill. Looking back upon it now, I see it was laughter
through tears. I was well aware of that they were playing the fool
in order to cheer me up after being bedridden for so long.
Choe Kum Suk’s care of me even included telling me a false
date to prevent me going back to Macun before I recovered
completely. Whenever I came round from a coma, I asked her how
long I had been unconscious, and each time she would reduce the
real period. For instance, if I had been in a coma for two days, she
said it was two hours and if it had been five days, she would say
five hours. After recovering completely, I added up the days from
what she had told me and thought that only ten days had passed
since I fell ill. I felt quite relieved to hear that.
The lie she had told me was exposed when Choe Chun Guk
came to visit me. This honest political instructor could never tell a
lie. He told me that I had been bed-bound for a month. She
reproved innocent Choe Chun Guk for his tactlessness, but I
immediately gathered myself and returned to Macun.
A mountain of information was awaiting me at headquarters.
The data illustrated various aspects of the Japanese imperialists’
moves to bring Jiandao under their rule.
During the month I had been ill, the enemy had completed the
preparations for winter “punitive” operations. High-ranking
329
officials dispatched from the Japanese Cabinet had come to
Jiandao and reached a final decision on the plan for winter
“punitive” operations against the guerrilla bases in east Manchuria,
after discussing the matter with the brains of the army,
gendarmerie, police and diplomats in the field. The issue had even
been discussed at a Cabinet meeting in Tokyo.
At meetings the Japanese imperialists held to discuss the
problem of Manchuria, they claimed that “Operations for public
peace in Manchuria must begin with Jiandao!” They asserted that
the conquest of Jiandao was inseparably linked not only with the
great cause of building up the puppet Kingdom of Manchukuo but
with the security of the frontier of the Empire of Japan; its
conquest was therefore a matter of great urgency for the sake of
Manchukuo as well as of Japan herself. They also alleged that this
campaign should be blessed for the sake of the future of the great
Kingdom of Manchukuo and that the commander of the Kwantung
Army, whose mission it was to invade the Soviet Union, should
supervise the police institutions in Manchuria and that its provost
marshal, charged with the control of the army, be in the forefront
of the conquest of Jiandao.
After rigging up Manchukuo the Japanese imperialists had
adopted several important measures to maintain public peace in the
area. They committed a division of the Kwantung Army to
“punitive” operations as a replacement for the Jiandao task force,
established an armed constabulary in each county, and established
a secret service, judiciary police and industrial police; in this way
330
they made the police structure three-dimensional and expanded it
on a large scale.
Associations for the maintenance of public peace were
organized throughout Manchuria as joint consultative organs of
Japan and Manchukuo for the liquidation of insurgents and the
pacification of public opinion. Each province and county was a
unit, in addition to the centre; furthermore, various spy
organizations emerged and stretched out their tentacles towards the
communist camp. Through the introduction of the collective
security system which had existed in China in the old days and
which had proved effective for Japan in the maintenance of public
order in Taiwan and Kwantung area, the Japanese and Manchukuo
police bound the people hand and foot. Large-scale colonization
by armed Japanese immigrants who were reserve soldiers and the
expansion of the self-defence corps forces helped to check the antiManchukuo, anti-Japanese forces which had deep roots in the three
provinces of northeast China. The Japanese imperialists
empowered local secret-service policemen engaged in the work
with rebels to execute them on the spot.
All of these measures showed what painstaking efforts the
Japanese imperialists had exerted to dominate and retain the
colony of Manchukuo. A particular headache for them was the
armed struggle in the Jiandao area, waged by Korean communists
who struck at the face and back of the Empire in the northeastern
corner of China, and the full-scale national liberation movement of
which this struggle was a mainstay. It was no exaggeration when a
331
Japanese provost marshal said that the conquest of Jiandao would
be 90 per cent achieved if the Korean communists’ activities were
suppressed. The so-called great Empire of Japan was so afraid of
the Anti-Japanese People’s Guerrilla Army and the guerrilla zones,
its strongpoints. The Japanese imperialists therefore made frenzied
attempts to eliminate the anti-Japanese guerrilla zones in east
Manchuria at any cost.
In the summer of 1933 the military authorities of Japan recalled
to Korea part of the Jiandao task force which had suffered heavy
casualties from the attacks of the AJPGA and dispatched in its
place the Hitomi unit and many other crack troops of the
Kwantung Army to various parts of east Manchuria. The main
forces of their occupation army in Korea were concentrated in the
northern frontier region of our country, so that they could be
promptly committed to “mopping-up” operations in the guerrilla
zones. Large armed forces–over ten thousand men in all–encircled
the guerrilla zones in Jiandao and began winter “punitive”
operations.
Directing his main effort to the Xiaowangqing guerrilla zone,
where the General Staff of the Korean revolution was situated, the
enemy hurled against this area forces of 5,000 men from the
Kwantung Army, the puppet Manchukuo army, the police and selfdefence corps. The density of the enemy’s troop dispositions in
this battle has never been surpassed in any war except the wars of
pre-modern days in which the belligerent armies contended for
victory in square formation, and the battle fought in Lushun (Port
332
Arthur) during the Russo-Japanese War, since the advent of
skirmish-line warfare. The enemy even put his air force on alert.
Special detective teams supervised by the Jiandao secret service
were also dispatched to the areas surrounding the guerrilla zones.
Thus the whole region of east Manchuria became the field of
the most fierce and bloody battle between the Japanese imperialists
and the Korean communists. It was more a final showdown than a
battle for the defence of a few guerrilla zones.
The guerrilla forces in Xiaowangqing were only two
companies. Worse still, food reserves were low there. The guerrilla
bases in east Manchuria found themselves in a critical situation
that threatened their very existence. No one in the guerrilla zone
was optimistic enough to believe that the two companies could
defeat the powerful enemy armed with guns and aircraft. We were
caught between two alternatives–fighting to the last man or
abandoning the guerrilla zone and surrendering to the enemy. We
chose to fight to the last.
According to the principles of guerrilla tactics, the best thing to
do was to avoid a showdown. But if we did not fight, the enemy
would swallow up the guerrilla zones on the Tuman River in a
single gulp. If we did not defend these zones the revolutionary
masses who had been enjoying genuine equality and freedom
under the care of the people’s revolutionary government would be
frozen, starved and shot to death in the dead of winter.
Furthermore, the people would no longer look up to us.
The autumn scenery of Wangqing was magnificent, but it was
333
about to be ruined by the furious storm of the winter “puntive”
operations. All of the guerrilla zones turned to us in tense
anticipation. The people’s countenances brightened or clouded
depending on the soldiers’ expressions.
I began to look for some ingenious scheme, but none occurred
to my mind. There was no man at my side with whom I could
discuss tactical problems. Pak Hun, a graduate from the Huangpu
Military Academy, was absent; Kim Myong Gyun, xiaogezi (little
man–Tr.), who had served in the Soviet army for some years, and
Ri Ung Gol, a graduate from a military academy of the
Independence Army, had disappeared after being accused of being
members of the “Minsaengdan.”
Ryang Song Ryong, too, had fallen a prey to the
“Minsaengdan” nonsense.
I even thought how happy I would be if such a famous general
as Hong Pom Do was with us. Hong was a Righteous Volunteers’
Army general who had won a brilliant repute on the soil of
Wangqing. The brilliant victories the Independence Army had won
at Qingshanli and Fengwugou could be said to be the brainchild of
Hong Pom Do. Some people belittled him by saying that he was a
general who fought with an intuitive knack, without any strategy,
but that was nonsense. What they had described as a knack was in
the final analysis the product of strategic genius.
When he was alive, my father often said that Hong Pom Do was
a man of remarkable resources. Had he not been a resourceful
man, he would not have dealt such a telling blow to the Japanese
334
army on the Gaoli Pass by employing skilful ambushes so cleverly
and prudently. Those who could not discern the intelligence
concealed beneath his woodcutter’s appearance, should not have
claimed that they knew him. Many years had passed since this
commander-in-chief of the Korean Independence Army, who once
had had the area around Haerbaling under his thumb, concealed his
whereabouts. His image seemed to be fading from the people’s
memory with the passage of time. My distressed mind was
tormented by a yearning for help from my forerunners.
As I was struggling day in and day out with the problem of
strategy in the log-cabin of the headquarters, the old man Ri Chi
Baek called on me with a pot of honey one midnight.
Holding out the pot to me, he said, “I am sorry that I did not
give you anything when you were suffering from fever. Please take
this honey to help you recover.”
“Wild honey is worth its weight in gold. You did wonders to
obtain it.”
“Old man Ma who lives at the entrance of Hwanggarigol got it.
A few days ago he boasted that he had collected some wild honey,
so I went to see him. He gave me the whole pot, saying he would
sell even his house to obtain anything that was helpful to your
health. I am on my way back from his house now.”
I felt my heart overflow with gratitude for their consideration.
“Thank you very much, but I am young. You should take this
honey.”
“Please do not decline the kindness of old man. I have suffered
335
constant regret for not nursing you. You look haggard beyond
description, Commander.”
He pulled at my sleeve, suggesting that we take pot luck at his
house. I followed him without objecting. A meal with him was
welcome, but I was more interested in spending a night in the
house still scented by the presence of Pan. Even though I had
moved my lodging, I left a large share of my affection with the
generous, kind-hearted family who had taken care of me as
warmly as if I was their own son.
We ate corn gruel mixed with kidney beans and pumpkin as a
midnight snack. The food tasted sweet, perhaps because I had just
recovered from my febrile disease. The hostess, Mrs. So Song
Nyo, was well aware of my likes and dislikes in food. The most
notable food she used to treat me to was potato and maize roast.
The potatoes in the Jiandao area were large and the year-old ones
contained a lot of sugar. Such roasted potatoes with turnip pickle
soup tasted wonderful on a day when it was snowing heavily.
After the snack I lay beside the old man in the room where Pan
had stayed.
The old man could not sleep for some reason; he kept sighing
continually. I thought he was yearning for his son who had passed
away a few months before. His son, Ri Min Gwon, had been
severely wounded in an attempt to disarm Guan’s unit when it was
about to surrender to the enemy in the spring of 1933; he had died
while undergoing treatment in a hospital in Qiuyuegou. I myself
participated in the ceremony held in the memory of Ri Min Gwon.
336
In September 1932, a memorial service for the guerrilla, Choe Yun
Sik, was held in this house.
“Why do you keep sighing all night long, father?”I asked him,
pushing aside the quilt and turning round on the bed to face him.
“I cannot go to sleep. How can I sleep in peace when I have
heard that thousands of the enemy are encamped at the entrance to
the guerrilla zone? They say that the guerrilla army will be crushed
in this ‘mopping-up’ operation. What do you think, Commander?”
“It is a false rumour spread by the reactionaries. But if we don’t
make full preparations, the guerrilla zone will collapse in two or
three days. Frankly speaking, the destiny of the guerrilla zone is
hanging in the balance. So I cannot sleep, either.”
“It makes no sense for the guerrilla zone to be destroyed. How
can we live without this zone? We would rather kiss the dust or
give up the ghost.”
“You are quite right. If we are to die, then we must fall in this
guerrilla zone. But what should we do? The enemy numbers
thousands, and our army defending Xiaowangqing is no more than
one hundredth of the size of the enemy.”
The old man puffed nervously at a cigarette and spoke in a
serious tone of voice, pushing his pillow in front of my face, “If
you are short of soldiers, I will become one for you. There are
quite a few old men like me in Xiaowangqing who know how to
fire a rifle. They will be able to fight much better than the
Kanghwajin guard corps if each of them is given a rifle. I think
there are rifles and ammunition that the Independence Army
337
soldiers buried somewhere near Zhongqingli where we lived
before. If you can find them, you can surely arm the hunters and
the old men who were Independence Army soldiers in the old days
as well as the young people like my son-in-law, Jung Gwon, who
is busy with some kind of youth work. Everyone should become a
fighter and fight to the death fight. If we have no rifles, we must
defend the guerrilla zone by clutching the enemy’s throat and
giving him a belly throw.”
At the time when I was in despair over the disparity between
our forces and the enemy’s, his remark suggested to me that the
only way out of the impending difficulties was an all-people
resistance. I felt confident that we could seize the initiative in the
fight if we fought a death-defying struggle in every quarter, by
enlisting not only such paramilitary organizations as the selfdefence corps and the Children’s Vanguard, which I had intended
to use to man the front line with the guerrilla army, but also the
unarmed people. The defensive battle at Xiaowangqing would
have to be a battle between the enemy’s army and every soldier
and civilian in the guerrilla zone, rather than a battle between the
enemy’s army and the anti-Japanese guerrilla army. We could also
count on the support of the people from the semi-guerrilla zone.
This talk with Ri Chi Baek encouraged me. I thought, “He is
right. When the people say they will fight and they can win, they
mean what they say. Victory in war depends on the will of the
people and on how efficiently one enlists them.”
Thus I received my first inspiration while listening to the calm
338
voice of an old man who represented the opinion of thousands of
people in the Wangqing guerrilla zone. The plan of operations we
were mapping out had without fail to contain the people’s will as
expressed by the old man Ri.
I resolved that the defensive battle we were going to wage at
Xiaowangqing should be made an all-out fight fought by all the
people, young and old, men and women, in the guerrilla zone. This
definition of all-out resistance was an expression of our supreme
confidence in the people in the guerrilla zone, who had been
sharing life and death, weal and woe, with the army for the past
two years. The significant period for which fighting itself had been
our routine in the guerrilla zone allowed me to feel such
confidence. The guerrilla zones could not have remained strong for
two years after their establishment through the efforts of the army
alone. One factor was the efforts of the people, who had played a
considerable part in building up the army and defending the
guerrilla zones. When we fought a hard battle with the enemy, who
was ten or a hundred times stronger than us, we felt strong when
we had the people in our rear. When we sensed their breath as they
ran along the trenches, bringing hot water and rice balls, our
combat efficiency increased a thousand times.
This faith in the people’s strength underlay my decision to fight
an all-out battle and my plan of battle. This determination
conformed to the people’s will to become an integral whole with
the army under all circumstances and their determination to live in
the guerrilla base, if they were to live, and die there if they were to
339
die. An all-out effort by the people, when enlisted, would be a
formidable force.
This was the reserve force of the guerrilla army suggested by
the old man, Ri Chi Baek. But in fact the people of the guerrilla
base were not a mere reserve force; they were a most reliable
component of the main force.
We reaffirmed the tactical principles of attacking and
destroying dispersed enemy forces by concentrated initiatives and
of dispersing and harassing the enemy behind his lines when he
came under attack from concentrated forces. We then called on all
the people in Xiaowangqing to offer all-out resistance.
In response to the appeal, all the organizations and social strata
turned out as one for the preparations for the decisive battle. The
self-defence corps and young volunteers’ corps advanced to the
defensive position together with the guerrilla army and the young
and middle-aged men without weapons piled up rock barricades on
the steep heights along the line of defence. The famous hunters
Jang, Choe, Ri and others from Wangqing came to Macun, formed
a hunters’ corps with the veterans of the Independence Army, and
then took the field. The women’s stretcher teams and cooking units
also went on the alert. Children set spiked wooden planks in the
roads along which the enemy’s convoy was expected. The infirm
and small children were evacuated to safe places.
We made full preparations for the fight in the determination not
to follow in the footsteps of the Independence Army under the
northern political and military administration, which had fled,
340
deserting Wangqing. We would rather fall in battle.
Wangqing had witnessed not only the victory at Fengwugou but
also the bitter grief of the ignominious defeat suffered by the
Independence Army under the northern political and military
administration which retreated, leaving its compatriots to suffer
unspeakable “punitive” atrocities.
In south Manchuria there had been an Independence Army
organization called the western political and military
administration; there had also been the northern political and
military administration in the area around Xidapo, Wangqing
County, in east Manchuria, which was expanding the area under its
military influence with So Il as its president and Kim Jwa Jin as its
commander-in-chief. It was said that the patriotic fighters affiliated
with the administration numbered 500, and the organization had
had one million rounds of ammunition as well as funds amounting
to 100,000 yuan. The cadet-training school (military academy) run
by the organization in Shiliping had been a considerable size; it
could accept more than 400 cadets. The processions of animaldrawn convoys carrying supplies of straw sandals and provisions
contributed by the peasants in Wangqing and its vicinity to the
political-military administration used to stretch back as far as
Xidapo. This army, in cooperation with the Korean Independence
Army of Hong Pom Do, had once annihilated a large force of the
Japanese aggressors’ army at Qingshanli.
When Kim Jwa Jin, in grey serge uniform, with a sword at his
side, passed by on his white horse with bluish mane, the people in
341
Wangqing, men and women, young and old, used to bow deeply,
as if they were greeting the cortege of the Prime Minister or the
King of feudal Korea. They did this to express their gratitude to
the Independence Army for the victory at Qingshanli. But at the
news of the imminent massive “punitive” attack on Jiandao by the
Japanese army, the renowned General Kim Jwa Jin and his men
had vanished, without offering the slightest resistance. Unaware of
this, the Wangqing people had gone out on the road to have a look
at the commander-in-chief, Kim Jwa Jin.
Only one company remained. For some reason this company
had attended the graduation ceremony at the Tongil School just
prior to the “clean-up” of Jiandao. In accordance with custom the
school had prepared a sumptuous feast for the grand graduation
ceremony. As soon as the ceremony was over, the soldiers had
given three hasty cheers for independence, sat at the table and
wolfed down unrefined liquor, rice cakes, cold noodles and other
food. When the “punitive” forces arrived, they all fled. The pupils
and their parents, too, had scattered in all directions. The scene
was said to have been like a disturbed anthill. The “punitive”
forces had shot, bayoneted, and slashed with swords the
defenceless people who were running helter-skelter for their lives.
The Independence Army under the northern political and military
administration had been routed. The people in Wangqing lamented
over the sudden ruin of the army which had seemed so impressive.
If such a tragic event were to recur in the land of Wangqing,
where power was in the hands of the people, we would not have
342
the face to claim that we were the sons and daughters of Korea.
We decided to strike at the enemy by employing elusive
tactics–ambush, allurement, surprise attack and night storming–as
guerrilla warfare required. We had evolved these guerrilla tactics
ourselves in the course of defending the guerrilla zone from the
enemy’s repeated “punitive” offensives.
In the early days, when the Korean communists defined
guerrilla warfare as the basic form of armed struggle and began to
put it into effect, we had known practically nothing about tactics.
We could have referred to the experiences of others and their
manuals if they had been available, but we could not find them. So
we sent a man to the Soviet Union to obtain some reference
materials on war, including the combat experience of the Civil
War; they had been of some help to us in understanding the
concept of guerrilla struggle and the method of organizing
ambushes and surprise attacks, but they had not been suitable for
our actual situation.
As a first step to writing a manual of guerrilla warfare in our
own style, I finished writing a pamphlet after the battle at Jiapigou
at the end of March 1933. The pamphlet was titled Guerrilla
Actions, and it brought together the initial military experience we
had gained in our armed activities in the space of more than one
year.
The pamphlet dealt with fundamental matters, ranging from the
guerrillas’ spiritual and moral qualities to the general principles of
guerrilla warfare. It also codified all of the principles and methods,
343
ranging from the organization of guerrilla combat actions such as
raid, ambush, defensive battle, march and bivouac, to guerrilla
skills such as firing, handling weapons and discipline. Needless to
say, this was not a great book of military science such as Sun-tzu’s
Art of War or Clausewitz’s On War. But in the situation at that
time, when we had neither renowned military theoreticians nor
veterans of armed struggle, the pamphlet was a valuable handbook,
representing the simple theory of our own style of guerrilla
warfare. The officers and men of the guerrilla army studied it until
it became dog-eared from being carried in their rucksacks, and
they tried their best to apply the regulations specified in it to their
military practice.
Guerrilla Actions, together with the Guerrilla Manual which
was published later, provided prototypes for the establishment and
development of our revolutionary armed forces and Juche-based
tactics.
On November 17, 1933, the enemy attacked the Xiaowangqing
guerrilla zone from three directions in combined operations of
infantry, artillery and air force. The descendants of the Samurai
fell upon the guerrilla zone like angry wolves, growling and
threatening to bite at everything, even at the trees standing there.
These wild invaders seemed intent on swallowing up the land of
Wangqing at a single gulp.
The hordes of “punitive” troops crawled in waves over the
frozen ground, their aircraft continually bombing Macun and
Lishugou where the military and political headquarters were
344
located. The enemy’s tactics had become more brutal.
Previously, when frustrated in his attack he used to retreat to
his camp and then resume his onslaught. But now he did not
retreat even when his advance was checked, but stayed at the
point he had reached, consolidating the line he had established
before advancing again, step by step. Employing this
murderous tactic, he destroyed every life and burnt down
everything he came across.
However, our army and people heroically defended the guerrilla
base in unbreakable unity.
The fiercest of the battles was fought on Mt. Ppyojok and the
outpost in the Ssukpatgol on Mt. Mopan, the gateway to the
guerrilla zone. The 3rd company and the Anti-Japanese SelfDefence Corps manning these mountains mowed down the
attackers with a surprise barrage of gunfire, grenades and rocks
when the enemy had advanced to within 20 metres. The enemy
attacked tenaciously in waves, but failed to penetrate the line of
the outpost. The defenders on Mt. Mopan destroyed the enemy’s
highly mobile cavalry that was outflanking the defence at a bend
of the River Dawangqing.
As the enemy committed large forces in the successive waves
of attacks on Mts. Ppyojok and Mopan, we switched from an allout defensive to a war of attrition, employing flexible manoeuvres
mainly designed as enticements and feints, in combination with
positive defensive actions. This was a uniquely flexible tactic for
destroying the enemy forces continuously by employing a variety
345
of combat actions, and not allowing the enemy a moment’s
breathing space by constantly drawing him into engagement on our
own initiative. Had we clung to a stereotyped defence, and not
employed mobile tactics in good time, the guerrilla army would
have been routed by the enemy’s tenacious attacks based on
numerical and technical superiority.
In line with our new tactics, the guerrillas, along with the
members of the paramilitary organizations, withdrew from the
outposts; they lured the enemy deep into the defensive zone and
crushed him with constantly-switching tactics–ambush, sharpshooting, raiding the enemy’s campsites and burying bombs in the
bonfire.
Bombs could be buried in bonfires even by small boys, and the
effectiveness of the measure was assured. Whenever we moved
from one position to another we made sure that bombs were buried
in the bonfires. As soon as the enemy soldiers reached the deserted
position, they would gather around the campfires to warm
themselves. Then the bombs would explode, blowing up the
enemy. O Ryong Sok, the fourth younger brother of O Paek
Ryong, working with the women of the self-defence corps, killed
the enemy by this method at the central sentry post on Mt.
Ppyojok.
We also organized frequent night raids on the enemy’s camps.
Raiding parties of two to five guerrillas would infiltrate the
enemy’s position, scatter leaflets to disillusion the enemy forces
and fire a few shots before returning. Three or four shots fired at
346
the enemy’s tents or his campfires would transform his entire
camp into bedlam. Such raiding parties were sent three, four, and
even five times a night. The enemy soldiers were unable to sleep
all night; they trembled in fear and shot at random among
themselves. The enemy was so scared by our constant raids that
war lunatics began to appear among his ranks. Some enemy
soldiers surrendered to us after reading such leaflets as “Appeal to
the Japanese Soldiers!” and “Appeal to the Puppet Manchukuo
Army Soldiers!” scattered by the guerrillas.
Hunters armed with matchlock rifles, also fought. Though they
were old, their marksmanship was marvellous. Their admirable
skill in shooting only enemy officers could be compared to that of
modern snipers. The members of the women’s association rushed
to and from the trenches with rice balls and hot water on their
heads. Children until 10 years of age came to the battlefields and
beat drums and blew trumpets to boost the men’s morale.
A conspicuous feature of Operation Macun was the showers of
rock blocks from outpost positions, like those on Mt. Ppyojok.
These piles of rock would roar down upon the attacking “punitive”
forces, killing and wounding them en masse. The thunder of a
rock-slide down on the steep slope and the clouds of dust like
gunsmoke struck terror into the aggressors’ hearts. This method
also proved very effective in halting the advance of the enemy’s
cavalry, vehicles and artillery.
One of the heroes shown up by these battles was a guerrilla
with a nickname of “13 bullets.” He had been known in the
347
Wangqing area as an adventurous young man since the time when
he had captured rifles from a tax office on the Tuman River on
assignment from the YCL organization. When he arrived at the
office he had said, “How are you, panjandrums? I am a Korean
young man, a member of the Young Communist League.” He
introduced himself, then took out a revolver and took down three
rifles hanging on the wall without any great hurry. Then he rang up
the police station and shouted, “What are you doing over there?
There’s a communist here. Come over here quickly, all of you.”
The police station had hastily dispatched mounted policemen to
the site of the incident. He had returned, only narrowly escaping
being killed. He had repeated similar adventures afterwards. I do
not need to describe here the kind of criticism he received from the
YCL organization.
This young man performed a great feat at the post in the valley
of Ssukpatgol, a feat worthy of being recorded in the annals of the
anti-Japanese revolution. A ten-man blocking party had been
stationed at the post at all times. The head of that party was none
other than this young man, “13 bullets.” He was the platoon leader
and was also in charge of the YCL group in that party. A large
“punitive” force consisting of Japanese and puppet Manchukuo
soldiers and self-defence corps men, surrounded the valley under
cover of darkness one night and started attacking the post. The
blocking party was involved in heavy fighting from dawn. They
repelled the enemy’s charge seven times until one corner of the
log-cabin that was serving as a post had been burned down.
348
Calling a YCL group meeting in the thick of the battle, the young
man said, “Comrades, behind us is the guerrilla base and our
beloved brothers and sisters. If we fall back a single step from
here, we will have no right to live in this world as young Koreans.
Let us hold out to the last, even though it costs our lives, even
though our bodies are torn to pieces!”
The blocking party members, ablaze with hatred, fixed bayonets
to their rifles in order to fight hand to hand with the enemy. “13
bullets” was keen to fight in that way as well. But he calmed
himself, in order to carry out his assignment. This brave fighter,
who had been criticized for his self-opinionated attitude and
adventurism, had grown into a seasoned commanding officer who
could control and regulate himself in bloody battles.
When we reached the valley with reinforcements, he was lying
at the post with 13 shots in his body. Hence his nickname–“13
bullets.” Members of the blocking party had been wounded in
seven, three and two places. They were given the nicknames of
“seven bullets,” “three bullets” and “two bullets.”
The people in Wangqing called him “13 bullets” instead of his
real name. I also called him by his nickname. Eventually his real
name faded from the people’s memory. It is annoying that I cannot
remember his real name. But I draw comfort from the fact that the
nickname he earned in the anti-Japanese war will have a more
lingering effect on the minds of the readers than that his real name
would have.
The battle became heavier as the days went by. People were
349
evacuated from Xiaowangqing which had been reduced to ashes
by the gunfire of the Japanese army to Shiliping. The enemy killed
everybody who came into their sight–soldiers and civilians, young
and old, men and women. Hundreds of people were killed in
Xiaowangqing during the winter “punitive” operations. When we
were fighting in front of a lumber camp at Wucidao in Shiliping, a
Japanese army unit, which had passed a sentry post disguised as
refugees, fired a machinegun at the backs of people who were
moving from Macun to Dawangqing. This raid alone cost us scores
of casualties. The enemy surrounded the village of Duchuanping in
one night and killed all the sleeping people with volleys of
machinegun fire. The family of Paek Il Ryong, a secretary of a
district committee of the youth association who was a skilled
playwright, were all killed. A great number of children in
Xiaowangqing were killed during the “punitive” operations of that
year.
When the situation in the guerrilla zone was at its worst, the
refugees in the valley of Lishugou numbered more than 1,500. The
guerrillas went to indescribable lengths to evacuate them to
Dawangqing. Sometimes the procession of refugees moving to
Dawangqing would be cut to pieces by a surprise attack from the
enemy; then, they would wander about the woods the whole day
trying to find one another. At that time I covered the evacuation of
the revolutionary masses all day long, carrying babies in my arms.
Other guerrillas, too, helped the old and the sick, while carrying on
fighting. This heartbreaking picture was the initial point of unity
350
between our army and people of today. It was a picture painted in
blood and tears.
When I look back upon the scene of that day as we took the
refugees from Lishugou to Shiliping, I feel a lump rise in my
throat.
Many of the refugees had not eaten cereals for 20 days because
of the enemy’s “punitive” operation; they ate bean pods and dried
turnip leaves for their meals. In Shiliping for lack of cereals they
boiled cowhides and ate them.
If we show our younger generation the “foodstuffs” the people
in the guerrilla zone ate during those years when they were too
hungry to lift up their heads to see the sun in the sky, they will not
be able to hold back their tears at the subhuman starvation their
forerunners suffered.
Kim Myong Suk (from Yanji) lost her two children and she
herself came within an ace of death, for she had not yet recovered
from the period of spring food shortage before the barley harvest.
As she had not eaten anything for a whole week, she could not
think of burying her children outside, even though she saw them
starve to death with her own eyes; she lay in the hut without
moving, for she had no energy to sit up. Her neighbours came and
managed to pull the bodies of her dead
children away from the hut and bury them in fallen leaves; they,
too, had eaten nothing for a whole week and were too weak to dig
graves. When she ate boiled rice for the first time after her return
to her liberated motherland, Kim Myong Suk wept, recollecting
351
the spring famine in the guerrilla zone which deprived her of her
two children.
In the Chechangzi guerrilla base there was a man who, in the
battle at Yulangcun, had been wounded by eight machinegun
bullets, his skull being split open to reveal his brain, but had
miraculously survived. His tenacious grasp on life earned him the
nickname of “eight bullets.” Later he, too, died of starvation while
working in the government office at Dongnancha. On his
deathbed, he said, “If I had died when I was wounded eight times,
I could have been remembered as a hero. How lamentable it is to
die here of hunger!”
The enemy besieged the guerrilla zones and starved the people
to death or drove them out to freeze to death.
The Korean people endured unbearable trials in those years.
The sacrifices imposed upon them still rankle as unhealed wounds
in the heart of our nation.
The rulers of Japan are under a moral obligation to reflect upon
the crimes they have committed in Korea and Manchuria.
Repentance implies neither shame nor humiliation. It is a process
of self-reform by means of reason in the effort to approach
perfection. They may close their eyes, but time will never erase the
facts of history. Japan must remember that her high rate of growth,
the economic bed of roses in which she glorifies, is stained with
the blood of the Korean nation. Japan, also, has experienced a
national disaster in lives which were lost under foreign fire, and
her beloved daughters were raped by occupation troops, hasn’t
352
she?
In spite of the heavy losses he suffered having invaded the
guerrilla zone, the enemy tenaciously attempted to prolong the
battle in order to make us die of cold and hunger, by denying us
reinforcements and fresh supplies of weapons and provisions.
Effecting a decisive turn in the tide of battle was the only way
we could save the army and the people in the guerrilla zone.
Striking the enemy hard and harassing him behind his lines,
together with continued efforts to destroy him within the defensive
area was the only way we could save them.
Ever since my arrival in Wangqing, I had been opposed to the
tendency that had restricted us to the defence of the guerrilla zone.
In other words, my idea was to raid and destroy the enemy by
concentrating efforts when the enemy’s forces were dispersed, and
at the same time to disperse ourselves and harass the enemy in
many places behind his lines when he was already under
concentrated attack. This was called the tactic of avoiding the
enemy where he was strong and attacking him where he was weak.
Only then could we defend the guerrilla zone and preserve our
forces.
Most of the party cadres in the county and east Manchuria,
however, insisted that we should concentrate our efforts in defence
when the enemy was attacking us by massing his forces against the
guerrilla zone, to save the guerrilla zone and the people.
These differences in opinions regarding a tactical issue resulted
in a serious argument as to which of the opinions was in
353
accordance with Marxist principles. They contended that my
opinion was not an expression of Marxism but of escapism and
capitulationism, while I asserted the correctness of the tactic of
harassing the enemy behind his own lines.
I said that our forces, no matter how concentrated, would never
be equal to the enemy’s forces, so we should evacuate the
population, and leave only a part of the guerrilla force to shoot at
chosen points, while the rest of us should disperse and harass the
enemy from behind; for instance, ten guerrillas equipped with
rifles could take 30 or 40 unarmed young men with them to strike
at the enemy from behind at his weak points, then they would be
able to capture weapons and provisions.
Many comrades judged the situation correctly and supported
me.
But some bigots would not listen to me. Boasting of seniority
based on so-called activity, they said, “Young men should listen to
experienced people. How is it conceivable for the army to leave
the guerrilla zone when the enemy is falling upon us? This idea
means deserting the people in order to save the army.”
When the guerrilla zone had been reduced to ashes and many
people had been killed in a short space of time, I met Tong Changrong, Ri Sang Muk, Song Il and other cadres of the ad hoc
committee and county party committee, and insisted on conducting
harassing operations behind the enemy lines.
“Things have reached a dead end. If we go on in this way, not
only we, but also the people, will all be killed. Where can we
354
retreat? If we retreat deeper into the mountains as we are doing
now, there will be no houses and no food in the forest. Retreat will
get us nowhere. You seem to think that you and the guerrillas can
directly repulse the enemy, but that is hopeless. We should divide
the guerrilla army into three or four groups and send them into the
enemy-controlled area tonight. If we hit a few of the enemy’s
bases from behind, the ‘punitive’ forces will surely retreat from
Xiaowangqing.”
Hard battles were also being fought in other guerrilla zones in
east Manchuria. The people in Hunchun were driven towards
Jinchang and Huoshaopu, the people in Wangougou were driven
towards Dahuangwai and Sandaowan, and the people in Helong
towards Chechangzi. Even when things had come to this pass,
some of the leadership hesitated to make a decision.
So I asserted once again the idea of harassing the enemy from
behind and declared that I would fight according to my own
decision because the army was under my command. Then I
assembled the guerrillas and said, “We must not only hold on, but
strike the enemy from behind. Who will go to fight behind the
enemy lines? Any of you who will follow me, come along! I don’t
need many, only half of you, and the rest must stay here to protect
the people. Those who want to go with me, must break the siege
tonight. If we break through, we’ll survive. If we attack the enemy
bases and strongpoints one after another, the people will spread the
news. Then the ‘punitive’ forces which are attacking this valley
will fall back, afraid of being destroyed from behind.”
355
The guerrilla army was thus divided into two groups–one, under
the command of Choe Chun Guk, defended Shiliping, and the
other, under my command, went to the enemy-controlled area. The
YCL members evacuated 1,500 people from the guerrilla zone to
Luozigou.
We gave Choe Kum Suk the assignment of taking Tong Changrong, who was confined to his bed, towards Miaogou and nursing
him there, and put all our food reserve in her knapsack. That was
the last time I saw her.
That evening, in command of a detachment, I crawled through the
line of siege and penetrated deep into the enemy-held area. As we had
expected, the area behind the enemy lines was almost deserted. When
we entered a village near a certain town, the villagers were preparing
their feast for New Year’s Day. They said they thought everyone in
the guerrilla zone had been killed by the Japanese imperialist
“punitive” forces, and they were happy to see us; they treated us to
rich festive food like dumplings and millet cakes. That night Kim
Saeng Gil, a guerrilla of O Paek Ryong’s platoon, nearly died from a
belly-ache after eating 140 dumplings.
My men felt so tired the next morning that I posted a sentry and
let them sleep all day long. As they caught up on their sleep after
shivering in cold without proper food or rest for months, their
faces were radiant.
We began striking at the enemy the very next day. Our tactic
was to attack primarily the small bases of the “punitive” forces and
combine to attack considerably large bases.
356
We struck at the enemy first in Liangshuiquanzi, destroying a
puppet Manchukuo army unit and the self-defence corps, and then
fell upon the barracks of the Japanese consulate police. And then,
after a feinting manoeuvre far away from Liangshuiquanzi, we
again raided an enemy convoy of trucks at Xinnangou, capturing a
great amount of wheat flour and munitions. From there we slipped
away to the mountainous area of Beifengwudong and made
preparations for a new battle. On the night of February 16, 1934,
we eliminated most of the puppet Manchukuo army soldiers,
policemen and self-defence corps members in Beifengwudong,
and captured some of them.
After winning a victory there, we crossed the Beigaoli Pass and
advanced to Sidong; then we attacked the forest ranger base in
Tonggol, killing and capturing all the enemy at their barracks.
The final battle which made a decisive contribution to
frustrating the enemy’s winter “punitive” operations was fought at
Daduchuan, a site of strategic importance on the TumenMudanjiang railway. Disguised as a “punitive” force, we raced
over 25 miles of steep mountain pass by means of forced march,
divided our force into three groups, stormed the police station and
the quarters of the self-defence corps and set fire to the munitions
depot.
After this battle the enemy began to lift the siege of the guerrilla
zones and retreated to the position from which he had started 90
days before. He could not eliminate the “scourge.” The “punitive”
operations, which had threatened the very existence of the guerrilla
357
zones for three months, had failed.
The battle in defence of the Xiaowangqing guerrilla zone,
which for convenience’ sake was called Operation Macun, ended
in victory for us. This was a miraculous event which passed almost
unnoticed on the outskirts of a world preoccupied with the
assumption of office by Adolf Hitler, the trials at Leipzig and the
establishment of diplomatic relations between the Soviet Union
and the United States. I greatly regret not being able to describe in
vivid detail all the heroic efforts made by the defenders of the
Xiaowangqing guerrilla zone in the face of dire hardships.
We paid dearly for the victory. Hundreds of people lost their
lives under the gunfire of the enemy. The loss of Choe Kum Suk
and Tong Chang-rong caused me bitter pain. Among all the people
in the guerrilla zone who came running to greet us with tears on
their faces as we returned in triumph from behind the enemy lines,
I could not see Choe Kum Suk, who cared for me as lovingly as if
I were her own younger brother. The knapsack my orderly carried
for me contained a hand mirror I had obtained as a present for her.
There were also several sacks of trophies for the members of the
women’s association.
What harsh trials the members of the association had endured,
shedding bitter tears as they defended the guerrilla zone that
winter! How many meals they had cooked and how much root of
grass they had gathered! Two women, Hye Suk and Yong Suk,
lured the enemy who forced them to act as their guides to a place
where there were no guerrillas, and caused him many problems
358
before being killed. By shouting out that the enemy was coming,
Choe Chang Bom’s aunt lured towards her enemy troops who
were crawling up the cliff on which the guerrilla command post
was located. These were patriotic woman martyrs in the modern
war against the Japanese, just as Kye Wol Hyang6 and Ron Kae7
had been in the war against the Japanese invaders in the Middle
Ages.
My gift to beloved Choe Kum Suk had come too late. The
enemy had deprived of me the only woman I ever called “sister”
and felt so attached to in my whole life, the woman who used to
say she would not die and was more concerned for my safety than
her own when I said that both of us must fight on and live to see
the liberation of the motherland.
The death of Tong Chang-rong was also a heartbreaking loss to
me. He was one of the most unforgettable of the Chinese
comrades-in-arms who had taken loving care of me and respected
my ideas. We had frequently argued about important matters
concerning political lines. As he was somewhat obstinate, we had
now and then failed to reach an agreement, but such differences
had not affected our friendship. He had always respected me,
saying that I was the only man in whom he could place his trust
among the Koreans.
After the battle at Daduchuan we withdrew in the direction of
Yaoyinggou, and then returned to Macun, where we reviewed the
defence of the Xiaowangqing guerrilla zone. The people who had
returned from evacuation were building their houses on the ashes.
359
An old man told me he was building his house for the 70th time
since he came to the guerrilla zone–such was the vital energy of
the people in Jiandao who had decided to live in the guerrilla zone
no matter where, and die there should they have to die.
But for the assistance and support of such people, our guerrilla
army would not have succeeded in defeating the enemy’s largescale “punitive” operations. The victory of Operation Macun was
the result of unity between the army and people and of resistance
supported by all the people. The fighting spirit with which we
attacked the enemy in spite of all our disadvantages, as well as the
protean tactics which, supported by that spirit, we ourselves
evolved were the decisive factors in the victory of Operation
Macun.
Throughout the whole of Operation Macun the spirit of the
guerrilla zone was displayed, a spirit that had thrived and soared
aloft like giant trees on the soil of revolutionary power, on the
basis of the unbreakable will and mettle of our nation. This spirit
enabled us to defend every inch of Xiaowangqing with our blood,
with a strength which guns and planes were unable to conquer.
Operation Macun proved to be a brilliant military, political and
moral victory for our revolutionary army, enhancing its military
authority. In this battle we created a variety of new tactics, which
served as the backbone of future guerrilla tactics, and we laid the
organizational and tactical foundations for the switch to largeforce actions in the subsequent years. The Anti-Japanese People’s
Guerrilla Army acquired rich experience which enabled us to
360
repulse an enemy attack from any quarter.
Operation Macun ensured the successful defence of
Xiaowangqing, helped towards resolving the critical situation in
the guerrilla zones in the neighbouring counties, and made a great
contribution to promoting the overall Korean revolution centred on
the anti-Japanese armed struggle. The spirit of the heroic soldiers
who held out against the American invaders on Height 12118 in
the war in the 1950s was derived from the spirit of the guerrilla
zones in the 1930s. We still maintain this spirit as we advance
along the straight road of our own style of socialism within
imperialist encirclement.
No force in the world can ever break the spirit which was born
and tried in the flames of the anti-Japanese war. As long as they
possess this spirit, our army and our people will continue to
advance along the road of constant victory in the future.
361
6. Arsenals in the Thick Forests
When I was in Macun I often visited an arsenal which
manufactured arms and munitions. At that time we simply called
the arsenal an ironworks. There was an ironworks of this kind in
every county in Jiandao.
In the early days one or two people sent by the organization
made small weapons such as swords and spears, heating with
bellows the charcoal-fired furnace in the ironworks which was
sometimes called Macun Arsenal or Xiaowangqing Arsenal.
Just before Operation Macun I visited the ironworks and found
no fewer than seven or eight people working there. At that time
Kim Sang Uk was managing the ironworks in place of Pak Tu
Gyong, who had been transferred to the post of head of the food
department of the district government. Those I still remember
among the people working there are O Hak Bong, Choe Sang
Mun, Yang To Gil, Kang Hae San, Pak Yong Bok and Ri Ung
Man. Of these, Kang Hae San was the only man who had joined
the ironworks already possessing the technical skill of a
blacksmith. The others had almost no experience of handling iron;
362
they were rank beginners who had never repaired weapons before.
But some time later these novices were manufacturing bombs,
pistols, rifles and ammunition which we had thought could be
made only in a modern munitions factory, and furthermore they
made the gunpowder needed for them in a rural smithy which had
no lathe, drilling machine, shaper or milling machine. This was a
miracle achieved only in the war against the Japanese, a miracle
worked by the unshakable will and the revolutionary self-reliant
spirit of the Korean communists, who believed that victory in this
war depended upon the independent efforts of our own nation.
The naive people of Jiandao once planned to build a handgrenade factory in the guerrilla zone with the help of the Soviet
Union. This was the time when communists all over the world
looked to the Soviet Union in humble reverence as a beacon of
hope for the emancipation of humanity. The thought of getting
assistance from the country which had carried out a revolution
before any other gave rise among the people to a spirit of
dependence on others. While the idea of depending on others and
the aspiration to make a revolution with the support of others
engendered the idea of adulation of capitalist powers among the
nationalists, it was also the root cause within the communist
mentality of reliance on the Soviet Union. At that time we
considered it a natural internationalist duty for the communists of
the Soviet Union, the first country to have succeeded in a
revolution, to support the communists of the less developed
countries.
363
But the Soviet Union sent no reply to our request, neither a
promise to comply with it, nor notification that she could not do it
or was not in a position to assist us. It was at this time that we
resolved firmly to rely only on ourselves. The silence from the
Soviet Union confirmed us in our belief that self-reliance was the
only way to live, that the decisive factor in promoting the
revolution was to enlist our own forces to the maximum and
assistance from others was an auxiliary factor.
We therefore paid special attention to the work of the arsenal
and concentrated our efforts on it. When Pak Tu Gyong was the
manager of the arsenal, we had made sure that the arsenal was
equipped with such tools as anvils, hammers, pliers, sledges,
bellows, files and a boring machine. With these tools the workers
in the arsenal repaired damaged weapons or made new weapons
for the guerrilla army and the paramilitary organizations.
The most noteworthy of the weapons manufactured in the
arsenal was a single-loaded pistol made by cutting down the
barrels of shotguns and Model 38 rifles that had been damaged.
These pistols were not supplied to the army, but to the members of
the self-defence corps or the Children’s Vanguard. Single-loaders
made by the Yulangcun guerrilla unit were supplied mainly to the
political workers, and they enjoyed a great popularity among their
users. Cartridges were also renovated by removing the detonation
caps from the empty cartridges used by Model 38 rifles, putting
new caps in their places and charging them with powder.
Gunpowder was the most urgently required of all the materials
364
necessary for the manufacture of munitions, and it was difficult to
keep up with demand. At first the arsenals in the guerrilla zones
made bombs and renovated bullets with powder sent by miners
and underground workers. But this route of acquisition was always
dangerous and exposed the revolutionary organizations we had
formed with much effort in the mines to considerable risk. Many
people lost their lives in their attempt to obtain this gunpowder. A
typical example is the incident which had occurred at a pond near
Longshuiping, a village close to a mine in Badaogou. Kim Chol
Ho, Choe Hyon’s wife and comrade-in-arms, had developed into a
revolutionary in this village, in front of which there was a deep
pond with thick reeds. The people living in Longshuiping
cultivated rice by using the water from this pond, but this pond, the
lifeline of the peasants in the area, was turned into a sea of blood
in a single day. When the fiendish Japanese military police
discovered 20 miners from the Badaogou Mine who had sent
gunpowder to the guerrilla zone, they killed them mercilessly at
the pond.
This incident forced the leaders of the guerrilla bases and the
workers in the munitions sector to reconsider the conventional
method of acquiring powder solely through organizations in mines
and to seek out a new way. Each gram of powder with which the
arsenals in the guerrilla zones charged the bombs and cartridges
was the crystallized flesh and blood of the fighters.
We decided to produce our own powder. Some people said this
was like building a castle on sand, but I thought that if a man was
365
determined enough he could do anything, and we could surely
succeed, just as our ancestors had succeeded before us. With this
thought I began studying in earnest the history of gunpowder
manufacture and everything relating to it. In the course of this
study, I came to the conclusion that nitre, the basic raw material of
gunpowder, could be made manually.
Nitre could be made in any place inhabited by people, and we
could see it every day. One sunny day I took the workers of the
arsenal to the yard of Ri Chi Baek’s house, where ashes and
compost were piled up. I pointed to a substance like white salt
which had formed on the pile of compost, and told them that it was
nitre. When they heard this, they burst into laughter, saying that
they had been like an old man looking for the pipe he was holding
in his hand. We could obtain nitre from the sites of old toilets and
from the earth at the bottom of cowshed and stable manure piles.
It is well-known that in the Koryo period Choe Mu Son
invented gunpowder and thereby made a great contribution to the
defence of the nation. The firearms he manufactured were installed
on warships. The naval forces of Koryo inflicted wholesale
slaughter on marauding Japanese when they used these firearms in
the sea-battle off Jinpho. It is said that he refined ashes and dust he
gathered around his house to obtain nitre for making gunpowder.
Some people have claimed that the gunpowder of the Koryo period
was not the invention of Choe Mu Son, but a product he made by
applying a method learned from a foreigner. They alleged that our
country offered no theoretical or technical foundations on the basis
366
of which he could have invented gunpowder. I did not regard it as
a fair assessment. Historical records show that, at the time of the
Three Kingdoms, Silla already used firearms.
Our self-respect has been injured by the flunkeyistic and
nihilistic attitude of those who, on hearing of an invention of
another country, would praise the exceptional brain-power of the
people of that country, but shrug their shoulders in doubt when
they heard that a Korean had invented something.
The workers in the arsenals obtained nitre by a simple method.
They used earthenware, tin and ceramic containers with perforated
bottoms. They filled these containers with dirt collected from the
floors of stables and toilets and from underneath manure piles, and
then poured water into them. They caught the water dripping out
through the holes at the bottom, and then boiled it down in a
cauldron. The white crystal remaining was pure nitre. The upper
layer of crystals obtained in this way was called the horizontal
formation, and the lower layer, the vertical formation. The vertical
formation of crystals, which was deemed to have the characteristic
of exploding in one direction, was used for the cartridges of rifles
and pistols, while the horizontal formation, which was thought to
explode in all directions, was used mostly for bombs.
The raw materials needed for making gunpowder were obtained
through the efforts of the masses. Sulphur, an essential material,
was obtained from the insulators on the enemy’s telephone poles.
Gunpowder must contain an inflammable substance like alcohol;
Chinese white spirit was substituted for pure alcohol.
367
Our first experiments were not successful, but we were not
dispirited by failure; we repeated the experiments and at last
discovered the ideal proportions for compounding the powder.
I cannot forget the people who had participated in the
manufacture of gunpowder at that time. One of them was Son Won
Gum. I was not acquainted with him, nor had I met him before.
And yet I knew his personal history and his record of activity as
well as if he were my intimate friend.
Pak Yong Sun was the first man to acquaint me with Son’s
accomplishments. When he came to Macun to give a short course
on bomb-making techniques, he and I spent a few days together,
talking about the events taking place around us everyday. Every
now and then he would mention the name of Son Won Gum with
warm affection and respect. I began to listen with curiosity
whenever Son became the subject of our conversation. Pak was his
comrade-in-arms and had supplied a reference for his admission to
the party.
A man can achieve sudden fame for his exploits, his talent or
for an incident in which he is involved. In 1932 Son Won Gum
was well known among the revolutionaries of the Jiandao area for
his escape from a police station. He was arrested by the police
while acting as a messenger travelling from village to village
carrying a fiddle and disguised as a drug peddler. He escaped from
the station through a manhole of a sewer waist-deep in effluent,
painfully dragging a body injured all over by torture, and then
spent a full day in a river. It was amazing that he managed to
368
escape safely through the strict enemy cordon; even more
admirable was his endurance in supporting his bleeding body in
the water for an entire day.
He later joined the guerrilla army and the Communist Party, and
his sincere efforts made him a conspicuous figure. A rise in the
Suribawigol valley of Xinchengde hill in Jingucun was the site of
the Helong Arsenal, managed by Pak Yong Sun. The workers of
this arsenal were the first to produce a bomb known as the noise
bomb. The noise bomb was later developed into a chilli bomb and
then into a powerful bomb called the Yongil bomb.
The production of Yongil bombs required a lot of materials, and
the workers of the arsenal had to go to considerable extremes to
obtain these materials. Son Won Gum always led his company in
their efforts to find solutions to this knotty problem.
“We once encountered great difficulty in making the noise
bombs, because we were running short of the paper and cloth to
make the powder holders. Everyone racked their brains to find a
solution. Then Son hurried to the village before anyone knew what
he was doing, and returned with the paper he had torn away from
the doors of his house and cloth from his only quilt. I felt rather
ashamed, when I saw him returning, panting, to the arsenal at
midnight.” Pak Yong Sun told me this in Macun.
“If this is true, then he is a true revolutionary with wonderful
qualities,” I said, frankly expressing what I felt about him.
Pak went on to say, “Son always led the others in doing
everything. Once the manufacture of bombs was interrupted for
369
lack of wire, so he travelled many miles to Nanyangping and
brought back 300 metres of telephone line he had cut there. He
also obtained sulphur, scraps of iron and tin plates.”
One snowstormy night Son came to the arsenal carrying a
heavy load of tin plate and iron pieces, followed by a strange old
woman who was carrying an iron cauldron on her head. The old
woman’s unexpected appearance startled the workers.
As he helped the old woman set down the cauldron, Pak Yong
Sun asked him, “What’s all this, Won Gum? Why on earth did you
bring this grandmother all the way here when the Siberian wind is
cutting our flesh to pieces?”
Setting down the load from his back, Son shook his head and
said meaningfully, “I did not bring her, she followed me on her
own accord.”
Pak Yong Sun asked the old woman, “How come you followed
him, grandmother?”
“He’s an old acquaintance of mine. We got to know each other
when I was living in Neifengdong. When we could not afford to
buy any medicine for my daughter-in-law who was seriously ill,
this young man, who was selling medicine and advertising it by
playing a fiddle, gave us some medicine and rice for nothing. So
my daughter-in-law was saved. I was sorry that I could not repay
him for his kindness. Then, as luck would have it, he came to our
village today and asked every household for scrap iron. So we
thought this was our chance to repay his kindness. This is the
largest cauldron we have. I hope it will be of some help.”
370
She looked down dubiously at the cauldron she had set beside
the furnace.
Feeling embarrassed, Pak Yong Sun told her, “Thanks for your
offer, grandmother, but we don’t take new cauldrons; we only
accept the damaged ones. Please take this back.”
This made the grandmother angry. She said, “Don’t say that.
The Japanese swines burnt my two sons to death. I won’t regret
giving up this piece of iron.”
The workers of the arsenal made no more attempts to persuade
her.
On hearing Pak’s story I felt the urge to go to Helong there and
then and see Son Won Gum. The essential element of his image
which so captivated me was his iron-willed spirit of self-reliance.
I said excitedly to Pak Yong Sun, “You should have brought
him here now. His experience is a good lesson. How happy
everyone would have been to hear about his experience! You
should tell them about it for him.”
After the short course in Macun, Son Won Gum became known
throughout east Manchuria.
When Pak Yong Sun was leaving Macun after the short course I
said to him, “When you’re back in Helong, tell Comrade Son Won
Gum that his experience had a very good influence on the participants
in the short course. And tell him that one day we will meet and talk
about our feelings.”
But I never did meet him. In fact, he lost the sight of both eyes
in an explosion in the course of his work.
371
Manufacturing gunpowder was always dangerous. One could
even lose one’s life. The most dangerous work was charging the
bombs and cartridges. Pak Tu Gyong, Pak Yong Sun and Kang Wi
Ryong all suffered serious wounds while making gunpowder. And
yet, in spite of this, they did not leave their workplace.
Though deprived of his eyesight, Son Won Gum neither lost
heart nor became pessimistic. Instead, he inspired his comrades, by
saying, “Don’t feel sad, comrades. I’ve lost my sight, but I still
have my heart, two arms and two legs.” As he cut wire and
assembled bombs by touch, he sang the Internationale. He had
buried his father, elder brother and sister in the wilderness and
now he himself was blinded–a young man who had not yet lived
half his lifetime. When the guerrilla zones were evacuated, he left
his unit lest he should be a burden to his comrades-in-arms, and
went to Jingucun. Everyday he heard the enemy propaganda
slandering the guerrilla army and the Communist Party, claiming
that “The guerrilla army has been annihilated in the mountains,”
“The people in the guerrilla bases have all been starved to death,”
“Go to Chechangzi, and you will find nothing but skulls there,”
and “The Communist Party’s politics is destructive. You’ll get
nothing from that party.”
Son’s blood boiled in fury. He went from house to house,
telling people, “It is not true. The guerrilla army is still alive. It has
advanced over a wider area. It is eliminating the enemy in various
parts of north and south Manchuria. The guerrilla army, which at
first had only a few dozen soldiers, has now grown to a force of
372
hundreds and thousands of men armed with heavy guns and
machineguns. Compatriots and brothers, do not be deceived by the
enemy’s propaganda. Let us give stronger support to the Korean
People’s Revolutionary Army. The war against the Japanese will
surely end in victory for us.”
His journeying carried him as far as Yanji and Longjing,
hundreds of miles away beyond the boundary of Jingucun. The
Japanese army and police did not pay any attention to this “blind
beggar” who felt his way with a cane as he walked and carried a
fiddle on his back–as he had done before. When he heard the news
of the battle at Pochonbo on the road, he went around the streets
and alleys in Yanji, shouting excitedly; “Korean compatriots,
General Kim Il Sung and his army raided Pochonbo on the fourth
of June. The Korean People’s Revolutionary Army crossed the
Amnok River and advanced to the homeland which we long for
waking and sleeping. The enemy, scared out of his wits at the
revolutionary army’s strength, is now screaming in distress and
terror. Japanese imperialism is doomed.”
His fiery speech set the whole town of Yanji afire. But he was
arrested by the Japanese police and burned alive.
“Listen, everybody! I have no eyes, but I can see the bright,
liberated motherland. I beg you, stay firm until the day of victory.
Long live the Korean revolution!”
These were his words before he was executed. This pioneer of
the spirit of self-reliance ended his days at the age of 25.
Whenever he recalled Son Won Gum, Pak Yong Sun used to say,
373
“Won Gum died, without even knowing what it means to be
married.”
If he was still alive he would have many good things to say
about the spirit of self-reliance to the younger generation. His
career itself would become a living textbook of self-reliance.
The development of gunpowder production brought about a
great change in the production of munitions. As powder became
available, the production of bombs increased quickly. A bomb
consisted of a fuse and a tin. Tins were sent by the underground
organizations in the enemy-controlled areas and semi-guerrilla
zones, and into them was inserted something like an oil bottle
charged with powder, the gap between the tin and oil vessel being
filled with broken pieces of damaged ploughs and other steel
splinters for shrapnel, and then the fuse was connected. This made
a simple bomb.
Since it was produced manually, the bomb was neither
convenient nor attractive to the eye. Clumsy handling could easily
cause an accident–one guerrilla army soldier lost an arm through
igniting the fuse too slowly during an assault on the enemy in
Liangshuiquanzi. But this bomb was much more effective than a
hand grenade. The Japanese were terrified of our guerrilla army’s
bombs.
Once gunpowder became available, we were able to make
wooden guns. Wu Yi-cheng’s unit fought using guns similar to the
anti-tank guns nowadays which we could not afford. We made
wooden guns instead. Shortly after the battle of the Dongning
374
county town the people in Wangqing made the first such wooden
gun from an ash tree. We tested the gun during the assault on
Daduchuan, and its blast produced thunderous results. It would be
only natural to doubt the effectiveness of a hand-made wooden
gun. But after our first shot from this gun, the enemy fled in
horror. The people in Helong also made wooden guns at the
arsenal in Moguyuanzi, Yulangcun. When they fired one of these
guns on Qianli Hill the Japanese soldiers and policemen in
Erdaogou, eight miles from the hill, would create a hubbub–they
were frightened out of their senses! When the revolutionary army
fired its wooden guns the enemy was stupefied, for it was beyond
the limits of their common sense and imagination to believe that
we could make guns in the guerrilla bases, which had no technical
equipment.
The revolutionary zeal, indefatigable spirit and creative
initiative displayed by the workers of the arsenals in making and
repairing
weapons should indeed inspire admiration in the people’s hearts.
At that time the arsenals of the guerrilla army had hardly any
modern machines or tools. The people in Wangqing had only one
boring machine, and the workers of the Helong Arsenal managed
by Pak Yong Sun had one hand-operated drilling machine they had
obtained through a man in Dalazi who worked as a steel forger.
My memory is unclear as to whether the Toudaogou and
Nengzhiying Arsenals in Yanji County had any such machines or
not. Apart from the boring machine and hand-operated drilling
375
machine, files were the best tools they had. The workers of the
arsenals used their files to repair everything. They repaired the
cartridge extractor and firing pin of a rifle by filing, grinding,
hammering and tempering them in fire, water and clay. Soon they
were even able to repair machineguns without any difficulty.
There were numerous talented people among the workers in the
munitions sector, such as Pak Yong Sun, Son Won Gum, Kang Wi
Ryong, Pak Tu Gyong, Song Sung Phil and Kang Hae San. They
were skilled enough to set the eye in a needle.
The secret of all these miracles was quite simply the spirit of
self-reliance. If the Korean communists, from the early days, had
not thought solely of relying on themselves, but remained captive
to an illusion of help from communists in other countries, and if
they had not cherished the unshakable belief that relying on
themselves was the only way to survive and to revive Korea, the
arsenals would never have sprung into being in the guerrilla zones,
and such powerful weapons as wooden guns and Yongil bombs
would never have been produced. We could have appealed to the
people for war funds as the Independence Army did, or gone to
other countries begging and entreating for help. Once you begin to
beg, you begin to fawn on others, sinking to the despicable depths
of licking the soles of the others’ feet or plucking the mucus from
their eyes if they tell you to.
The slogan of self-reliance that we raised in the early days of
the anti-Japanese war, and the strenuous efforts we had made to
implement it ever since were also in accord with the prevailing
376
revolutionary situation. The Japanese imperialists’ invasion of
Manchuria had aggravated the contradictions between Korea and
Japan and between China and Japan, and these contradictions
inevitably presented the Korean communists with a task of high
level combat–an armed struggle. If we had clung to mendicant
diplomacy, begging other countries to help us, instead of relying
on ourselves, we would not have started the war against Japan
immediately after Japan’s invasion of Manchuria, nor would we
have developed our guerrilla army into a powerful force within a
few short years.
Self-reliance was the slogan which most correctly reflected the
people’s aspiration and the demand to liberate the country by
enlisting the nation’s own independent efforts and its own
strength. It was no accident that people quickly accepted this
slogan, transforming smithies into arsenals and building new
weapons-repair works in all sorts of places.
Self-reliance and fortitude was the basic spirit underlying not
only munitions manufacture and repair but every aspect of the
anti-Japanese revolution; it was the criterion by which to measure
one’s loyalty to the revolution. We did not regard any man who
was not self-reliant and did not strive hard as a true revolutionary,
no matter how ardent his patriotism, or how committed he might
be to communist ideology, because self-reliance was the key to
success in the revolution. The leaders of the nationalist movement
in the past had been attached to dependence on external forces;
they accepted the illusion of Wilson’s theory of national self-
377
determination because they were devoid of the spirit of selfreliance.
In Yilangou, Yanji County, there is a village called
Nanyangcun. After the harvest and spring struggle the Japanese
army and police descended on this village, mercilessly slaughtered
the innocent people and young men, and burnt down their houses.
The political workers dispatched to the village gathered the young
people and stirred their spirits by saying, “We conduct a nonviolent political struggle, but the enemy resorts to arms. We cannot
defeat the enemy with bare hands. The time has now come to take
up the life-or-death armed struggle against Japanese imperialism.
What do you think we should do, comrades?”
One young man, shaking his fist, said, “Let us make spears out
of scrap iron. If each of us had a spear, we could stab the enemy
and capture his weapons, couldn’t we?”
The young man had an old father, Ri Thae Sun, who had been a
blacksmith. He went on to say that the tools his father had used
were still kept in his shed, and that they could surely be used to
make swords and spears.
The young people immediately agreed, saying, “That’s right.
First let’s make swords and spears, and then capture rifles with
them.”
Using the hammers and pliers with which the old man, Ri Thae
Sun, had forged farm implements, they began to forge spears out
of the metal hoops of cart-wheels over charcoal made from the
roots of birch trees, in a valley beyond the common people’s reach.
378
They put an edge on the forged spears by whetting them on a
stone.
The unaccustomed sound of hammering ringing out beyond the
village attracted the curiosity of the old smith, and he came to the
valley. The young people hid the spears they were making in the
grass and pretended to be making steel for tinderboxes.
The old man cast a dubious glance over the young people and
asked, “What are you making?”
“Steel for tinderboxes, sir,” they answered in one voice.
“You don’t seem to know what you’re doing. Give that hammer
to me.”
In an instant the old man made steel for ten tinderboxes, and
then returned home with the tools.
Next day the young people took the tools again when the old
man was away in the field, and began forging spears. He appeared
unannounced at the young men’s open-air smithy as he had the
previous day. He asked them sternly, “What have you done with
the steel I made for you yesterday, you children, and why are you
making new steel?”
His son replied on behalf of his friends, “Other people have
taken them.”
This scene was repeated several times. The old man soon
realized that the young men were not making steel for tinderboxes.
Why would they take up smithying in the busy farming season just
to make steel? One hot summer day the old man approached them
unnoticed along the furrows of the maize field and found them
379
forging spears, learning the skill from his son.
“I was wondering just what you were doing all the spring and
summer, and you were making preparations to get killed, you
stupid.”
As he fussed and objected collecting the tools together, the
embarrassed young people grabbed him by his clothes, saying,
“Why should we sit with folded arms when the enemy is killing
young people like flies?”
Dumbfounded, the old man nodded his head and thought for a
while before saying with dignity, “You hammer and I will hold the
pliers. And keep a strict watch.”
That day he made spears for more than ten young people. But
then the young men in the neighbouring village came with scrap
iron and damaged cart-wheel hoops and exchanged them for all the
spears, saying that they should show kindness to people who had
no blacksmith.
The old man said that spears could not be made of carbonic
steel and ordered them to dump the pieces in the furrows of the
field. Instead, he forged scores of daggers and spears from the
high-intensity steel of scores of octagonal chisels which he had
been concealing.
Armed with the daggers and spears the old man had forged, 20
young men of Nanyangcun raided a small unit of the puppet
Manchukuo army moving from Yanji to Jiulongping, capturing
lots of weapons and ammunition. The old man praised their victory
delightedly. Under his management the secret smithy in
380
Nanyangcun went on to produce many swords and spears.
Eventually, even bombs were produced in the smithy. The old man
devoted his life to producing and repairing munitions until he was
captured and killed by the enemy.
This is only a single instance demonstrating the vital force of
self-reliance. In this fashion, self-reliance opened a new era in the
history of the national liberation struggle in our country, the era in
which everything was created from nothing. These vital phases
may be regarded as living proof of the correctness and power of
the communist method of solving all problems by allowing full
scope to the people’s strength and wisdom.
Self-reliance was the most important method by which the
Korean communists established the principle of Juche in their
struggle, and they could neither think of nor speak about Juche
apart from self-reliance, nor could they imagine the development
of the Korean revolution without this quality. Only self-reliance
was capable of eradicating once and for all the worship of great
powers which was still a great fetter on the spiritual life of our
people in modern times and allowing us to pave a new way to
victorious national resurrection by following the ideal of
independence, self-development and self-sufficiency. Self-reliance
was the touchstone with which to distinguish a man equipped with
the spirit of Juche from a man who was not.
We therefore consistently inculcated the revolutionary spirit of
self-reliance in the masses from the very first day of the war
against Japan. The idea that, while help from others would be
381
welcome, we must and could liberate the country through our own
efforts even without others’ help; the idea that, while help from
higher echelons in solving our problems would be welcome, we
must find the solutions to all our problems through our own efforts
and wisdom, even without such help–this idea easily won the
sympathy of the masses. But quite a few people still retained
remnants of the outworn ideas, and either did not believe in their
strength or underestimated it.
Some of those who had welcomed our appeal to carry through
the revolution by placing our faith and reliance in the strength of
our people became dubious and perplexed in the face of a minor
problem such as arming ourselves.
One day, when we were absorbed in the military training in
Antu which was part of the preparations for the founding of the
guerrilla army, Ri Yong Bae and Pang In Hyon broke a rifle’s
firing pin while cleaning it. In view of the conditions at the time,
when each rifle had to be captured at the cost of blood, this was a
serious case which could not be allowed to pass with impunity.
After examining the broken pin carefully, I said to them, “I will
give you one day; repair it by this time tomorrow!”
They both stared at me wide-eyed. They clearly had not
expected me to make such a preposterous demand.
“How can we repair a rifle manufactured in a modern munitions
factory? We can fight a battle or risk our lives, but this is
something we cannot even imagine doing with our poor skills,
isn’t it?”
382
“How can we call our undertaking by the sacred name of
revolution if it is something that can be achieved simply by
picking out the easy jobs to do? I think that the true meaning of
revolution and the pride of a revolutionary lie in doing those things
nobody dares to do.”
“But the broken pin is made of steel. Can it be repaired with
theory alone?”
Pang In Hyon looked gloomily at the bolt with pin in his hand.
Until that moment he regarded my demand to repair it as absurd
and unreasonable. What would be the consequences of a
commander revoking his orders at such a moment? Though I knew
my orders were unusual, I told them again coldly, “If you cannot
repair it, you are not entitled to be guerrillas. How can you carry
through the complicated enterprise of social transformation when
you cannot repair a little pin? If you do not intend to repair it, you
may not participate in drill from tomorrow.”
When I threatened them in this way, they were all startled; they
promised me to repair it and asked me to teach them the method.
“I don’t know the method, either. You must discover it
yourselves.”
They left the training ground with the bolt with the broken pin,
their faces stained with tears.
Next day they appeared at the training ground, their faces
beaming, for they had repaired the pin. It was not repaired
perfectly, but it worked as it was meant to. The other comrades
were all surprised. Even I, who had given the orders, could not
383
believe my eyes. How could they, who had said they could not
even imagine repairing it because they had no skill, repair it with
so little difficulty?
Pang In Hyon hastily explained the repair process:
“At first we thought of making a new pin with wire, but we
could not get proper steel wire. So then we heated the broken pin
and extended it by beating it out. We whetted it on a stone and
managed to shape it, but the problem was to make it hard again.
We went to Xiaxiaoshahe to see an experienced smith who lives
there. He told us to temper it in oil. We did as we were told and
this steel is the result.”
Their experience greatly excited the others. Everyone greeted
with excitement the lesson that any one could work wonders if he
had faith in his strength and made effective use of it.
I still remember the bright smiles covering the faces of Ri Yong
Bae and Pang In Hyon as they ran to the training ground with the
repaired pin in the hand. The smiles were doubtless an expression
of immeasurable pride in their own strength. What ecstasy on earth
can be more powerful than the pleasure and joy a man feels when
he finds a strength he thought he did not possess?
A rifle’s firing pin is not such a big thing. One could easily
capture 10 rifles in the time it takes to repair it. But the lesson
learned from repairing it generates a power greater than that of a
hydrogen bomb.
Marx and Engels defined the history of the development of
mankind as the history of class struggle and, needless to say, this is
384
a correct proposition. The history of mankind can also be said to
be the history of man discovering, creating and perfecting himself.
In other words, it is the history of the creation of the human being
who continuously discovers and develops in himself the powers
and skills peculiar to himself and, at the same time, the history of
the struggle to defend the independence of the popular masses. It
can also be called the history of innovation by a human being who
has steadily refined himself in the political and ideological,
cultural and moral, scientific and technological dimensions.
Through the effort of creation and innovation, mankind has
ushered in the age of the rocket, computers, genetic engineering
and the green revolution.
From this point of view we can say that self-reliance is a
powerful force which has driven the development of history. If
people had lived simply believing in the grace of God, the “Lord
of Creation,” without developing their own strength, they would
still be lost in the Paleolithic Age.
When we were operating the arsenals at full pressure in various
parts of east Manchuria, Shi Zhong-heng hinted to me that there
was a munitions works which had once been managed by Wang
De-lin’s national salvation army in the Dongning county town.
This information increased my interest in the town. According to
Shi Zhong-heng, the works was organized in the spring of 1932 as
an ordnance repair shop equipped with a few lathes, casting
facilities and sewing machines. From the latter half of 1932 this
shop developed into a comprehensive munitions factory with more
385
than 200 persons involved in manufacturing hand grenades, mortar
shells, 25-cartridge automatic rifles, and the guns known as hogguns. Since that time the factory had been equipped with new
machine-tools and other means of production. The weapons
manufactured in this factory had been supplied mainly to the NSA
units in Dadianzi, Wangqing County, and the Ningan region.
Following the Japanese occupation the factory was dissolved, but
its equipment and machines were left intact. If we had succeeded
in taking the town completely into our control in the autumn of
1933, the factory would inevitably have become ours and we could
have armed ourselves more adequately with up-to-date light and
heavy weapons.
The experience gained in the munitions industry in the guerrilla
bases in the first half of the 1930s was applied and developed in
the arsenals built in the bases on Mt. Paektu during the latter half
of the 1930s.
We organized a sewing unit in each of the guerrilla bases and
thus solved the problem of military uniform by our own efforts.
The cloth was obtained, dyed and sewn by ourselves. We boiled
down the bark of oak, black walnut and Amur cork trees in a large
cauldron and soaked the cloth in the water to dye it khaki.
Sometimes the colour of the cloth varied a little with the
proportion of the barks from various species of trees.
The first members of the Wangqing sewing unit were Kim
Ryon Hwa and Jon Mun Jin, who had once been a nurse at a
hospital in the village of six households. There was also a male
386
designer, but I cannot remember his name. The unit was later
reinforced with Ri Il Pha, Kim Myong Suk and Kim Sun Hui. It
also employed temporary workers when it was short of hands.
Jon Mun Jin made my uniform in the days in Xiaowangqing.
When I went from Antu to Wangqing, the women in the unit said
they would make a fine uniform for the young general and they
sewed a full uniform set, including an overcoat, for me. The
material was ordinary cotton cloth dyed by hand, but each stitch
eloquently declared warm and delicate care of the makers’ hands.
The Xiaowangqing sewing unit, with only two or three sewing
machines, made all the uniforms needed for a battalion or a
regiment and even full-dress uniforms to the order of battalion or
regimental headquarters for the officers and men of the Chinese
nationalist units. A full-dress uniform included coat, trousers, cap,
puttees and cartridge belts. The amount of work assigned to the
unit by far exceeded its capacity. When they were overburdened
with work, the diligent and faithful sewing-unit operatives would
press on with their work without sleeping at night. When they
were sleepy, they dipped their faces in water and sang to keep
awake. They sang so much that they all learned scores of
revolutionary songs by heart.
The first leader of the Xiaowangqing sewing unit was Kim
Ryon Hwa. The people in Wangqing called her a hoyden. Some
even called her a tomboy, since she occasionally smoked a
cigarette. But this frivolous woman was very skilful at knitting and
sewing. She began to learn sewing after she got married. Her
387
husband was a misfortunate one-legged man. The first most
significant means for earning a livelihood she had found in her
hopeless struggle with poverty was doing needlework for others.
Her skill in sewing had developed since then. She not only made
smart uniforms, but also fine Chinese clothes. Those who had
accused her of being a tomboy would now bow their heads in the
direction of the valley where the sewing unit was situated, saying,
“Please accept my humble greeting, sister,” when once they had
tried the clothes she made for them.
Many of the members of the sewing unit were forerunners of
the culture of self-reliance with no less enthusiasm than the arsenal
workers. Kim Myong Suk, Jon Mun Jin, Han Song Hui, An Sun
Hwa, Choe Hui Suk, Kim Yong Gum, Kim Su Bok, Choe In Suk,
Pak Jong Suk, Jo Yong Suk, Pak Su Hwan, Ma In Ok and Kim
Son were all master-hands who accompanied us and worked hard
to produce tens of thousands of uniforms. I cannot find the words
to describe adequately the well-known last moment of An Sun
Hwa, and the heroic death of six members of the sewing unit at the
secret camp in Ganbahezi.
We built hospitals in each of the guerrilla zones to treat the
wounded and ill. All the medical appliances used in the treatment,
such as scalpels and tweezers, were made by the technicians in the
arsenals and most of the herb medicines were obtained and
produced by the medical workers, with the help of the masses.
There were only a few modern medicines.
There was nowhere we could turn for doctors and nurses, so we
388
had to train them for ourselves. A few pioneers who had been
doctors of Koryo medicine trained a great number of assistants.
Rim Chun Chu and Ri Pong Su were not only famous doctors with
distinguished records but also qualified teachers who rendered
meritorious services in the training of our medical reserves. How
many people’s lives were saved by their treatment, so that they
could return with joy to their units!
We also solved the problem of food grains by relying on our
own resources. It was not in our style to solve this problem by
setting the people an amount of food to be delivered and then
collecting it from them. We proposed the aim of attaining selfsufficiency in food for the army and the paramilitary organizations
such as the Red Guards, Anti-Japanese Self-defence Corps,
Children’s Vanguard and the young volunteers’ corps, and issued a
strong demand to them to cultivate crops through their own efforts
on the arable land in the guerrilla zones. In the latter half of the
1930s, when the Korean People’s Revolutionary Army expanded
over a wide area and was conducting large-scale guerrilla warfare,
we sent troops to the rear to farm at the foot of Mt. Paektu, away
from the battle fronts.
Self-reliance was thus essential to the survival of the
revolutionary army in the long-drawn-out war against the
Japanese. The realization that one could survive only by relying on
oneself became a part of the thinking of all the guerrillas; selfreliance became their motto. Those who made this motto their very
lifeblood upheld their honour even on an isolated island, and those
389
who did not surrendered to the enemy or left their ranks,
abandoning their principles halfway.
The seed of self-reliance nurtured by the anti-Japanese
forerunners in the snowstorms of Paektu was implanted in the
minds of the people of the whole country after liberation, serving
as the motive power that kindled the flames of the effort to build a
new Korea and gave birth in this eastern corner of the world to the
legendary Chollima. When we began a project to manufacture an
electric locomotive at a small factory which had been a repair
shop, a foreign ambassador to our country said that he would pass
through the eye of a needle if the Koreans made electric
locomotives by themselves. The pleasant whistle of the electric
locomotive Pulgungi-1, which our workers and technicians made
by relying on their own ability, shattered the ambassador’s
complacent prediction.
The spirit of self-reliance that rang out in the hammering of the
arsenals in the guerrilla zones drove the pulse of the era of the
Workers’ Party and provided the powerful force that propelled this
era forward.
The spirit of self-reliance, born of the tempest of the war against
the Japanese, still pulses in the slogans, “Let us live our own way!”
“Let us meet the requirements of Juche in ideology, technology and
culture!”–slogans devised by the Secretary for Organizational Affairs,
Kim Jong Il–and in the slogan, “When the Party decides, we do
everything!” In the final decade of the turbulent 20th century our
people are advancing towards new heights singing the March of Self-
390
reliance, as they go.
391
7. An Immortal Flower
In the year 1933, the revolutionary organization in Wangougou
sent Kim Kum Sun (Kim Kum Nyo ) and Kim Ok Sun, pupils of
the Beidong Children’s Corps school, to Xiaowangqing, according
to the decision of higher echelon.
These two girls were talented members of an art troupe who
were held in special affection by the people of the Yanji area. They
came to Macun on an assignment from the revolutionary
organization to spread songs and dances in the Wangqing guerrilla
base, where there were many revolutionary people. In those days
the revolutionary organizations in east Manchuria used to send
many talented people to Xiaowangqing, the strategic centre of the
Korean revolution. The people in east Manchuria rendered every
assistance to Xiaowangqing, just as our people nowadays spare
nothing to support Pyongyang.
On their arrival at Macun the two girls, guided by the caretaker
of the Beidong Children’s Corps school who had accompanied
them, came directly to the army headquarters to see me. I found
them very young, not much over 10. At first I guessed they were
392
sisters. But they were not. Only their names were similar.
The caretaker of the Beidong Children’s Corps school
introduced the girls to me in turn, explaining with humour the
children’s records and their family backgrounds. That story was
very impressive. While the caretaker was telling me about her,
Kim Ok Sun wept. I, too, was close to tears, for the 13 years of her
life were full of tragic events.
When she was nine years old, she was engaged to a landlord’s
son who was more than 20 years old. The engagement was
arranged by fraudulent means without her knowledge or her
parents’. In those days a young man over 20 was regarded as an
old bachelor, and his parents were anxiously searching for a good
match through the offices of go-betweens. The young man was
apparently a dim-wit or cripple, with no hopes of getting married
by fair and just means. In fact, his parents, unable to find a mate
for their son who was now on the wrong side of 20, had hastily
forged the engagement by treating the girl’s father to a heavy
drinking bout and forcing the drunken man to sealing the
agreement with his thumb. According to the contract Kim Ok Sun
was obliged by law to marry the bachelor when she was 15 years
old. Her father remained unconscious of the outlandish contract for
two days. When he came to himself back at home he cried bitterly
in discovering in his pocket a document promising his daughter in
marriage, sealed with his fingerprint, and 80 yuan of money of
doubtful origin. The money was a present from the family of the
would-be bridegroom in return for the agreement. When she
393
learned of this, Kim Ok Sun’s life had been filled with tears. But
her father, Kim Jae Man, who had sealed his daughter’s future by
means of this piece of paper, soon bought a straw-thatched house,
a kitchen garden, an ox and a pig, and lived in quiet prosperity. He
seemed to think there was no use crying over spilt milk, no use
protesting against the power of the rich, and that the best thing to
do was to turn the money to good account, to turn the misfortune
into a blessing. Whenever his daughter wept over her future, he
would soothe her, saying:
“Don’t cry, my dear. That 80 yuan has breathed life into our
ruined family. Anyway, this is better than dying of hunger. You
will feel easier if you think that your engagement has saved your
family from destruction.”
The ignorant and simple man did not understand the revolution.
He was so naive that he thought he could free himself from
poverty, and even become a millionaire, if only he worked his
fingers to the bone. This led him to harbour illusions about the
landlord who was exploiting him. Now and then the landlord
brought something to eat to the house, so Kim Jae Man thought
there was no kinder landlord in this world than his. His daughter
once went to the yard of her school to listen to a speech by an
underground operative. When he learned about this, he beat her
cruelly, for he was afraid that his daughter might become involved
in the revolution.
Only when his village had been reduced to ashes for the fifth
time by the enemy’s “punitive” invasion was his class
394
consciousness aroused. His family lost their house and draught
animal at the hands of the invaders. Some of his neighbours were
killed in fire.
On the night when he sent his daughter to the Wangougou
guerrilla zone, he said, “We must stake our lives now on a lifeand-death struggle with the enemy, my dear. I was too ignorant of
the ways of the world. Now you must join in the revolution and do
away with those devils.”
Later Kim Ok Sun made her home at Kim Kum Sun’s house in
Songlindong; together with Kum Sun, she attended the Children’s
Corps school in Beidong and as a member of the district, and then
of the county art troupe, she participated in the work of
enlightening the masses.
Korean children like Kim Ok Sun at the tender age when they
should have been complaining of their lot to indulgent parents, had
to launch headfirst into the struggle with poverty, tugged to and fro
by the rough waves of a world which made no allowances for
them. Our children rose in resistance against this cruel world,
which was equally oppressive to young and old. The Korean
children in Jiandao formed revolutionary organizations such as the
Children’s Corps, the Children’s Vanguard and the Children’s
Expeditionary Corps in various areas, and participated in the
struggle as an organized force. All our boys and girls, educated
and trained in the revolutionary organizations, played their parts as
more than mere small cogs in the wheel of the revolution against
the Japanese.
395
Kim Ok Sun was one of these children, and so was Kim Kum
Sun. When I heard her story I could not but feel pity for Kim Ok
Sun. The misfortune of this little girl was the epitome of the
misfortune suffered by millions of Korean children.
How laudable and honourable their determination and mettle
were, when they left their dear homes at such a tender age and
came to the guerrilla base to work for the revolution! They had
walked hundreds of miles from Wangougou to Macun by way of
Dahuangwai and Yaoyinggou in order to support Xiaowangqing;
and how thankful we were! How admirable and praiseworthy for
these two girls to have come all the way to Xiaowangqing, making
their way along the thorny path with the help of their canes,
carrying heavy knapsacks on their backs and wearing work shoes
made for adults!
Thinking that I should exchange those work shoes for canvass
or rubber shoes, I asked them, “Who sent you to Xiaowangqing?”
“Mr. Yun Pyong Do did,” the girls answered cheerfully,
standing to attention, their hands on the sides of their skirts. Not
only were their eyes as bright as stars, but their voices rang with
refreshing vitality.
I was very glad. Being with children was one of the great
pleasures of my life. Their laughter relieved me my sense of
hardships and mental torment. Mix with children, share their
feelings, and you will feel a strong urge to live, and you will
understand that they bring beauty and variety to people’s lives.
You will also feel inspired with a sense of the noble duty of
396
bringing them to full bloom and safeguarding the ideals glowing in
their eyes.
Feeling pity for Kum Sun, with her calves and face covered in
scratches, I asked her:
“It must have cost you a great deal of trouble to come all this
way. Didn’t you find it hard to cross so many high passes?”
“We had a hard time of it with the blisters on our soles. But we
did not give any sign that we felt tired, in case the man who was
bringing us might send us back to Wangougou.”
“Wouldn’t it have been nice to stay at home with your parents?”
“Yes, it would, but when will we become grown-ups like that?
Our instructor in the Children’s Corps said we had to experience
hardships to become grown-ups. I want to grow up as soon as
possible, through many hardships.”
“Why do you wish to grow up quickly?”
“We will liberate Korea. Please don’t send us back home, for
mercy’s sake, Commander Kim.”
I was surprised at her manly way of thinking. Young as she
was, she was unusually advanced in her determination to devote
her life to the liberation of Korea.
“Don’t worry about that. You two girls are among the few
talented children in Jiandao–why should I send you back? Stay
with us in Wangqing from now on. Taking part in the Children’s
Corps life here will not be too bad at all.”
Kum Sun did not hide her joy; she clapped her hands.
I asked the leaders of the YCL in the county and district to
397
admit them to the Children’s Corps school in Macun, so that they
could continue their organizational life in the corps, and requested
they be provided with lodgings in kind-hearted households, so that
they would feel at home in this strange place so far away from
their parents.
That year the guerrillas and the people of Wangqing held a
grand May Day celebration in the playground of the Children’s
Corps school in Macun. The celebration was attended by all the
soldiers in the Wangqing area. The two girls from Wangougou
won first place in the running and high jump respectively that day,
receiving warm applause from the people of Wangqing.
Kum Sun was small in build for her age. When she walked,
with a knapsack on her back, moving her legs quickly in her light
gait at the head of the art troupe, everybody smiled at her pure cute
image.
I, too, derived much strength from this image. By nature, I
preferred optimists. In the days when we were fighting arduous
battle in the mountains and surviving on grass root, one optimist
gave more strength than dozens of guns. Kum Sun was an
outstanding fighter and optimist, representing the youngest
generation of the alliance of the three organizations–the
Communist Party, YCL and Children’s Corps.
Some days after I met Kum Sun, I called the pupils of the
school to the headquarters to learn how they were getting along.
From the outset the Children’s Corps members were always
supposed to carry a week’s emergency rations with them in
398
knapsacks. But many of the children I examined had eaten the
parched-rice flour supplied by the school. Only Kum Sun had kept
her rations quite untouched. After examining their knapsacks I
praised her by giving the thumbs up sign, saying, “The other
children have eaten theirs all, but Kum Sun, the youngest, has
resisted temptation splendidly. She is the best!”
She only smiled, looking shy, and then said, “I, too, have taken
out the powder pouch several times. I was scarcely able to
suppress the temptation to eat it.”
“But how did you do it?”
“While the others were eating the flour, I kept my eyes shut. If I
still felt like eating, I went outside. And when I could not bear it
any more outside, I went to the well and drank a dipperful of
water. Then I felt as full as if I had eaten the flour.”
I was moved to admiration by her fluent answer. This child’s
sorrowful mind mirrored the destitution of the people in the
guerrilla zone, and the noble aspiration of these young indomitable
eagles to develop the revolution staunchly in spite of crushing
poverty.
That day we gave each of the children ten cups of parched-rice
flour and some corncakes, and put matchboxes in their knapsacks.
A few days later we sent their school two cartloads of supplies,
including new padded clothes and quilts, shoes, notebooks and
pencils. We fought frequent battles, and had kept some of the
captured goods in reserve. Food and clothes were scarce, but we
sent a large share of the reserves to the Children’s Corps school.
399
“All the best things for the children!”–this has become an
immutable principle of our life nowadays; even in those difficult
days when we were fighting in a foreign land we would give the
children everything we could, according to this principle. In order
to obtain food, clothes and other things we needed for them, we
would not hesitate to take the army into battle.
We promoted the slogan, “Let us always be ready for the
independence of Korea and the liberation of the world’s
proletariat!” among the Children’s Corps and educated them in the
spirit of patriotism and proletarian internationalism.
They performed truly great exploits, no less significant than
those performed by the adults, enlightening the masses, giving
artistic performances, standing guard duty, delivering messages,
reconnoitring enemy movements, capturing weapons from the
enemy, and defending the guerrilla zone. When we were
rebuilding the log-cabins burned down during the enemy’s
“punitive” atrocities we could always see them at work, these
young eagles, running with rice balls along the trenches where
revolutionary soldiers were embattled, singing revolutionary songs
amid the flames of the battle fought to defend the guerrilla base. In
the farming season they weeded and harvested in the fields.
Sometimes they would pick wild fruits and send them to the
guerrilla barracks.
One day I saw the pupils of the Children’s Corps school
standing sentry at the central sentry-post on Mt. Ppyojok. With a
heavy grenade on each of their waists, they stood on guard, each
400
holding a 1.5-metre pole tipped with an iron spearhead. They said
they were relieved every hour. They changed the guards when half
of a joss stick the length of two matchsticks was burned away.
They told me the stick burned for two hours, and I thought this
method of measuring time quite ingenious.
These children once came to see me with a suit of clothes
consisting of lined Korean jacket and trousers, trouser-leg ties,
grey silk waistcoat, riding breeches, leather shoes, boots and black
rubber shoes. It was a token of their thanks to me for sending
trophies to their school on many occasions. In those days we sent
the Children’s Corps members all the Korean apples we captured
from the Japanese convoys. Many of the children were born in this
foreign country and had never been to Korea or seen a Korean
apple. Kim Ok Sun, who witnessed the event, often recalls with
warm affection the tears full of earnest gratitude, which the
children shed when they received the crates of apples.
Pak Kil Song, the head of the children’s department, visited
their school one day and told them, “Boys and girls, Commander
Kim takes loving care of us just as a father cares for his own
children. We are the beneficiaries of his love, unable to repay his
kindness. We have to show our thanks to him. What do you think
we should do?”
As soon as Pak finished speaking, Kum Sun stood up and said,
“Let us have some fine clothes made for him. They say he wears
unlined clothes even in the winter cold.”
Pak Kil Song smiled at her words.
401
“Kum Sun has suggested making some fine clothes for him.
What do you think of the idea?”
The children answered in chorus, “It’s a good idea.”
“Alright, then. I, too, had thought of making warm clothes for
him as Kum Sun has suggested. Let us obtain some cloth and have
some good clothes tailored by the women’s association members
or by the sewing-unit members. But you must remember that cloth
does not simply fall from the sky.”
Kum Sun stood up again and spoke freely:
“Let us pick mushrooms, dry them and sell them. They say
mushrooms are expensive. Once we have money, we can buy
cloth.”
The other children echoed her words enthusiastically, “That’s it,
that’s it. Let us pick mushrooms and sell them to landlords.”
Starting the next day they went to the mountains with Pak Kil
Song, carrying baskets. I saw them several times marching in line
past the valley in Lishugou, singing as they carried the picked
mushrooms, but I did not know the secret contained in those
baskets. I only thought they were going to all this trouble to gather
tasty food for the wounded in the hospital. Those mushrooms had
now been transformed into money and then into the clothes which
appeared before me.
After making the Children’s Corps salute Kum Sun said, “We
had a suit of clothes made for you, since you wear unlined clothes
even in the winter cold. Please accept it.”
It was true that I used to wear unlined clothes in winter. Taking
402
the clothes I felt like weeping, without knowing why. I said to
them, “Though I wear unlined clothes, I am in the prime of my
life. I will not forget your kindness all my life long. I am going to
give these clothes to a grandfather who is the oldest person in
Xiaowangqing; please don’t feel disappointed.”
They looked at me regretfully, tears on their unhappy faces.
They were very sorry that I had not accepted the clothes for
myself. I had to speak to them two or three more times before they
would smile.
After the mass meeting was over, Kum Sun came to me and
whispered, as she felt the sleeves of my uniform, “The cloth is so
thin that the wind will blow right through it to the bone.”
Even now, when the winter cold arrives, those words spoken by
Kum Sun in Xiaowangqing ring in my ears.
At first the Wangqing people used to call her “black eye.” They
gave her that nickname because her eyes were black. Some time
later she was given another nickname–“Macun hawfinch.” The
women from the Kilju and Myongchon areas gave her this
nickname because she was small and yet lovable like a hawfinch.
When people called her “Black eye!” she simply answered “Yes!”
and the same when they called her “Macun hawfinch!” She was
not offended even if they used her nicknames dozens of times a
day.
It was a red-letter day for the Wangqing people when Kum Sun
gave a performance of tap-dancing. She always danced with Ok
Sun and this dance received the greatest applause of all the items
403
in the performance programme of the art troupe of the Children’s
Corps. When she repeated the turn in which she wove a kerchief
between her legs while beating out a quick rhythm on the stage
with her feet, the audience would cheer and stamp.
During my days in Wangqing in the mornings I used to ride up
and down the valley of Macun on my white horse to learn about
the situation in the guerrilla zone, and think up new plans. The
morning ride was an essential part of my daily routine. The bugler
of the guerrilla army, Song Kap Ryong, and my orderly, Jo Wal
Nam, accompanied me on these rides. I always came across a
singing squad of Children’s Corps members on the road, and their
song delighted and refreshed my mind.
How can I adequately describe the feeling of satisfaction I felt
as I sat there on horseback and looked at those healthy, vivacious
faces with pink cheeks! I did not skip my ride even on snowy or
rainy days for I wanted to see them. I thought how they would
miss me if they did not see me on the road, when they had come
out in spite of the rain and snow. Their feelings were the same as
mine, they took their stroll in all weathers. Kum Sun always led
the chorus. In that unharmonious ringing chorus made up of scores
of voices we could easily single out Kum Sun’s peculiar chirping
voice. And when I heard that voice I felt a sense of security, and a
rather superstitious belief that everything would go smoothly in the
guerrilla zone, although I could not say why.
But one day I did not hear her voice among the chorus of the
pupils of the Children’s Corps school shaking the valley in
404
Lishugou. Feeling that I was listening to a strange song sung by
children from some other region, I went out into the yard of the
headquarters. The singing squad was just passing a small lane near
the headquarters. Kum Sun was standing at the head of the squad
as always. She was plodding along without singing, with her head
lowered for some reason. Ri Min Hak, the head of the Children’s
Corps, was leading the chorus that morning in her place. The
singing squad without Kum Sun’s leadership was just like a chorus
troupe deprived of its leading singer.
That day I could not settle down to work. I went to the school
shortly before sunset to see her, and there I heard the sad news that
her family in Wangougou had all been killed by the enemy. I
realized why she had marched with the singing squad with her
mouth closed and why Ri Min Hak had to lead the chorus in her
place. That day she rested her head on my lap and cried so bitterly
that she nearly fainted. Trembling like a sparrow soaked in water,
she said, “What can I do? What is the point of living when my
father, mother and younger brother have all been killed?”
It was difficult to console her. I stayed at the school until it
became dark, trying to calm her down.
“Steady yourself, Kum Sun. If you waver, and give in to grief,
the enemy will try to kill you as well. The Japanese swine are
trying to wipe out the Koreans in Jiandao. But we cannot let them
take our lives so easily. In spite of everything, you must grow up
to be a fine revolutionary and take revenge on the enemy.”
Only then did she stop crying and look up at me, wiping away
405
the tears.
“I will have my revenge on the enemy, as you have said.”
After this she became a girl of few words, and she did not laugh
easily. Indeed, she seldom laughed aloud or raised her voice to
chatter as before. When leading the chorus she no longer chirped
like a sparrow as she had done in earlier days. Her lovable
nickname, “Macun hawfinch,” disappeared from use in
Xiaowangqing. The young girl’s thoughts of vengeance were
expressed in her redoubled devotion to the life of the Children’s
Corps and the activities of the art troupe.
The art troupe of the Children’s Corps, with Kum Sun as its
main pillar, conducted brisk activities in such enemy-controlled
areas as Shixian and Huimudong in Tumen. The fame of the
Wangqing children’s art troupe extended as far as north Manchuria
and beyond the boundaries of east Manchuria.
In those days the communists in east and north Manchuria
maintained close contact with each other across the Laoyeling
Mountains. The natural barriers of the mountain terrain could not
prevent the communists in the two regions from constantly visiting
each other, and assisting each other.
The guerrilla bases which had transformed Jiandao into a
stronghold of the struggle against Japan had become a model of
the ideal land for which all the people yearned, and the new
society and order established in these bases aroused the
neighbouring people’s admiration and envy, they dreamed of a
similar life. In particular, the battle of the Dongning county town
406
was a turning-point in raising the prestige of the communists
among the people and armed units in Manchuria. After this battle,
the NSA soldiers began to call me “Commander Kim,” and in
general it was from that time that people began to call me “General
Kim” and “Commander Kim.” All the policies and democratic
measures we put into practice in the guerrilla zones were
addressed to the primary concerns of the times, and enjoyed the
blessings of all the people.
On several occasions the party organizations and military
departments in north Manchuria sent visitors’ groups to the
guerrilla zones in Wangqing and its vicinity in order to learn about
the experience of the people in east Manchuria in building
guerrilla zones.
The centre of Wangqing in those days was not Xiaowangqing;
it was Yaoyinggou. Kum Sun and the other members of the
children’s art troupe left Macun when, after the enemy’s largescale “punitive” invasion, all the structures of the guerrilla zone
moved simultaneously to Yaoyinggou. I also moved there with
some army units in the spring of 1934.
In the summer of the same year a visitors’ group from Ningan
County, consisting of underground organization members and
guerrillas, and led by Im Yong Ju, a woman secretary of the YCL,
came to Duitoulazi from Badaohezi via Shenxiandong. The local
people and guerrillas in Yaoyinggou gave the visitors a warm
welcome. The Children’s Corps members shouted, “A warm
welcome to the visitors’ group from north Manchuria!” and waved
407
triangular red flags. In the evening a bonfire was lit in the yard of
the guerrilla quarters and a performance was staged for the group.
The children’s art troupe staged a varied programme for the guests,
for they had many Children’s Corps members with exceptional
artistic skills. Ri Min Hak was good at dancing and playing the
harmonica. When he played a humourous part in a drama the
audience split their sides laughing. Kim Jae Bom was also a
talented dancer. He was especially skilled at imitating the gait of a
duck or a rabbit while he was dancing.
These children staged their performances and disseminated
songs, roving through every revolutionary organizational district in
Wangqing County.
We made dancing-dresses for the art troupe from the best silk
cloth among the trophies we had captured, and also solved the
problem of providing other stage costumes for them.
While staying in Yaoyinggou for some days, a small unit of the
Anti-Japanese Allied Army, sent by Zhou Bao-zhong, learned of
the experience gained by the Wangqing guerrilla unit. This was not
a simple tourist trip, more like training which combined drill and
practice. Throughout the days of their stay they followed the daily
schedule we had defined, and engaged in military drill, political
study and cultural activities, just as the Wangqing unit did.
We gave the YCL and Children’s Corps organizations
assignments to pay visits to their quarters regularly. When, after
much practice, the children’s art troupe managed to teach the
soldiers revolutionary songs in Chinese, the soldiers in turn taught
408
the children some interesting Chinese songs. On some days the
children would visit them, having prepared a drama in the Chinese
language.
The guests from north Manchuria were impressed by the
activities of the children’s art troupe, and would invite the children
to their quarters whenever they cooked delicious food.
On returning to north Manchuria, they publicized the children’s
art troupe very widely.
In the summer of 1934, Zhou Bao-zhong invited the children’s
art troupe of Wangqing to north Manchuria. We readily complied
with his request. I told Pak Kil Song that he should make good
preparations for the tour in order to delight the soldiers and people
of north Manchuria. Then I framed a detailed itinerary for the art
troupe’s activities in north Manchuria.
We sent the art troupe to north Manchuria in order to bring the
Chinese people some happiness and further consolidate our
solidarity with them.
Zhou Bao-zhong’s invitation to the children’s art troupe was
aimed at educating the men and officers of the Chinese nationalist
army units which were then under the influence of the
communists. Zhou Bao-zhong, who was working as the chief
administrative officer of the Suining Anti-Japanese Allied Army,
which was organized in the area around Ningan, was making
tireless efforts to rally the anti-Japanese forces that had dropped
out of Wang De-lin’s national salvation army.
After sending the art troupe to north Manchuria I felt ill at
409
ease for some days. My mind was never free of the worry that
the young ones might not reach their destination in safety,
though they were well used to battles, hunger and all sorts of
hardships. It would be difficult for all of the children, but how
could the young ones like Kum Sun negotiate the steep
Laoyeling Mountains? However, I need not have worried. All
the members of the art troupe were young eagles trained in the
maelstrom, indomitable fighters who had many times braved
the threat of death.
They easily crossed the mountains which I had considered an
impassable barrier, and passed safely through the area infested by
bandits. When it was raining, they marched on, wearing pine twigs
or the birch-bark on their heads instead of umbrellas. At night they
would cook rice for themselves in canteens, took a light meal and
then slept in the open air by the campfire, with guards posted.
Some children suffered serious stomach troubles deep in the
mountains. Worse still, their route of march was not the highroad
between Wangqing and Laoyeling, along which ox-carts and
sleighs had passed, but a steep short cut used only by the guerrilla
army messengers. And yet not a single straggler appeared among
them on the hundred-mile-long journey. I was told that even Kum
Sun, the youngest in the troupe, climbed over the mountains by
herself, singing as she went and rejecting the other children’s offer
to take her knapsack.
In later years Kim Ok Sun, who went to north Manchuria with
her, used to amuse me with tales about their activities among the
410
NSA units, whenever she had an opportunity.
The curtain rose on the children’s art troupe’s premiere at Chai
Shi-rong’s unit, stationed in Machang. Chai was the man most
under the influence of the communists among the leaders of the
Chinese national salvation army units. If we educated him in a
somewhat more efficient way, we could easily make an ally of
him, and there was even a chance of making him into a
communist.
The premiere in Machang began with a speech by Kum Sun. As
many as 150 officers and men enjoyed the performance together
with Chai Shi-rong and they were most impressed. As Kum Sun
finished her speech, they could not conceal their excitement, and
said, “How well that little girl speaks! We must fight against Japan
all the more bravely for the sake of that girl.”
Commander Chai was so moved that he took her to his room,
set her on his lap and put earrings and bracelets on her ears and
wrists. He even provided two coaches for the art troupe so that
they could travel to their performances.
The tour of performances, which had been scheduled to last for
one week, was prolonged several times at the request of the
Chinese nationalist soldiers. The art troupe also staged a
performance at Zhou Bao-zhong’s unit.
Chai Shi-rong presented them with two cartloads of gifts,
including padded coats, dabushanzi, scarves, pork, chicken, dried
starch noodles and wheat flour. He also gave each of the children a
satchel and presented them with some rifles.
411
When the art troupe returned to Yaoyinggou from the tour, I
was in another region with my unit. As soon as I returned to the
guerrilla zone, the children came and stood around me in a circle
and boasted of the gifts they had received in north Manchuria.
“These were all given to us by a man called Commander Chai.
He had a beard like Lenin, and he was very kind-hearted. I went to
his room and had some trotters. Mr. Zhou Bao-zhong also gave us
many gifts.”
This was how Kum Sun praised Commander Chai and Zhou
Bao-zhong; she set a 7-shooter at my side, saying, “You should
keep this revolver, General. We’ve decided.”
She emphasized the word “decided,” but as soon as she had
finished she laughed at herself for some reason I did not
understand. I carried the revolver for a few days in case the
children should feel disappointed; then I quietly gave it to the
leader of the young volunteers’ corps. I also ensured that all the
other arms were handed over to the young volunteers’ corps, and
the other gifts dealt with as the children’s art troupe wished.
That autumn a miraculous rumour that Kum Sun’s mother was
still alive spread throughout the Yaoyinggou guerrilla zone. When
she heard the rumour Kum Sun romped about the valley in
Yaoyinggou with scores of daisies in her hair; the people in the
guerrilla base who knew her family’s story were delighted to see
this.
The Children’s Corps organization decided to help her to realize
her wish to see her mother. At first Kum Sun who knew only too
412
well what her duty was and had a high sense of collective
responsibility, was not willing to accept the assistance of the
organization, saying that she alone could not enjoy such special
favour, when many other children also wanted to see their parents.
I saw her for the last time in the autumn of 1934 when our unit
was making preparations for the north Manchuria expedition in
Zhuanjiaolou. The children’s art troupe came to that region and
staged an art performance. I think it was a special performance
bidding farewell to the expeditionary force. After the performance
we caught a roe deer and made dumplings to treat the art troupe
members.
As I was going outside after looking around the house in which
they were taking their meal, Kum Sun pushed aside the dishes she
had been eating, hurried over to me and whispered in my ear as if
telling me a great secret, “I have heard that my mother is alive,
General.”
“It’s true. All the guerrillas are delighted at the news. I am very
happy, too.”
“I was so happy that I sang a solo three times today. And I
wanted to sing still more.”
“Then sing as much as you can.”
I picked a fine-toothed bamboo comb and a coarse comb from
among the trophies I had brought with me to give the children in
Zhuanjiaolou and put them in her hand.
“Thank you, General.”
She clung to my sleeve as if she were my little child. It was
413
heartening to observe jubilation in the behaviour and speech of this
lovable young girl who had never played on other people’s
affection in spite of her young age.
“Well, you must go to see your mother soon. I am afraid I
cannot see you off, for I have to go to north Manchuria.”
That was the last conversation I had with Kum Sun.
When she returned to her school after the art performance in
Zhuanjiaolou, the revolutionary organization in Yaoyinggou was
looking for a suitable person to transmit a classified document to
an enemy-held area. The organization was discussing seriously on
the problem of who would be safest and most appropriate as a
messenger. Eventually, Kum Sun was selected.
When the organization entrusted her, and nobody else, with this
important task, the young girl readily accepted it as an expression
of the greatest trust.
On the day she was to leave on the mission, Han Song Hui took
the girl to the waterside and washed her face, combed her hair,
fastened her shoes, and smoothed down her skirt as she would
have done for a bride. She pierced three acorns with a pin and set
them in her hair instead of a ribbon. That day the Children’s Corps
members accompanied her to the edge of the village to see her off.
Where are you going to?
I am going to Yanji.
Which hill are you crossing?
I am crossing Jiqing Pass.
414
Why are you going there?
I am going on a mission.
Whom are you going with?
I am going alone.
She walked with short steps through the forest, humming a
song. She made up the words as she walked along. The others
laughed, clapping their hands, to hear the song, and echoed her
words in a chorus which reverberated across the valley of
Yaoyinggou.
After delivering the message she was arrested, together with
several adults, by Japanese gendarmes while on her way to see her
mother. They were surely delighted to learn that she was from the
guerrilla zone, and thought that the “kid communist” would let out
important information. Apparently they discovered that she had come
from Yaoyinggou, and thought they might be able to drag confidential
information out of her, since the leadership structures of east
Manchuria were situated in Yaoyinggou.
It was in fact true that she knew secrets about many aspects of
the guerrilla zone. She knew a great deal about the movements of
the revolutionary army, the activities of the leadership, the secret
routes connecting the guerrilla zone to the semi-guerrilla zones,
the living conditions and attitudes of the people in the base, and so
forth. Since, as a member of the art troupe, she had performed on
many occasions in enemy-held areas, they might be able to
squeeze information out of her about the underground
415
organizations if they could break her. Aware of their opportunity,
they did their best to extract valuable information from her. At first
they treated her to delicious foods and cajoled her with sweet
words. Then they intimidated her and tortured her.
I once read a foreign story about a boy living in a village on an
island who was executed by his father because he was tempted by
a silver watch and revealed the whereabouts of a man who had
been hiding in a haystack. As the story suggests, it is easy to
persuade a child. Children can be tempted by things or give in to
threats or torture.
But children who have been trained politically through the
organizational life do not disgrace their honour. Not a single
member of the Children’s Corps ever abandoned his or her
political creed for a penny. So Kang Ryom, Ri Hon Su and Rim
Hyong Sam, who grew up under the care of our Party after
liberation, were all young boys of 13-15 years, but they did not
reveal the secrets of their organizations even when threatened by
the enemy’s bayonets during the Fatherland Liberation War.
Kum Sun was an indomitable young fighter tempered like steel
in the flames of the anti-Japanese revolution. This young daughter
of Korea refused to speak even under cruel torture. She only
opened her mouth to condemn and curse the hangmen.
The provost officer who was interrogating her said, “We will
kill you if you don’t say anything.”
“How nasty you are! I will not speak with bandits,” Kum Sun
answered.
416
The merciless hangmen decided to kill young Kum Sun for the
sole reason that she would not confess the secrets of the
revolutionary army. All the people, who saw the young girl from
the guerrilla zone, covered in blood and gore, dragged to the place
of execution, gritted their teeth in indignation. That field in
Baicaogou became a sea of tears. But Kum Sun shouted to these
mothers, fathers, brothers and sisters who felt such sympathy and
pity for her, “Why are you crying, dear fathers and mothers? Don’t
cry. The revolutionary army soldiers will surely wipe out the
enemy. You must fight staunchly until the day when the
motherland is liberated!”
Her fiery speech summed up the nine years of her life. The
execution site rang to her sharp cry, “Down with the Japanese
imperialists! Long live the Korean revolution!”
After hearing that she had been killed, I did not visit the
Children’s Corps school for some time. I somehow felt afraid of
going to the school. It was too sad and depressing to think of the
Children’s Corps school and children’s art troupe without Kum
Sun. The enemy had deprived me of the butterfly spirit of the art
troupe and the skylark voice of the guerrilla zone, who had been
loved so well by the Wangqing people.
Who would now sing as sweetly as Kum Sun and who would
dance as briskly, lightly and gracefully as she for the people in the
guerrilla zone as they fought bloody battles and combatted grave
difficulties? Who would enchant the officers and men of the
Chinese national salvation army with fluent Chinese songs, as
417
Kum Sun had done, and who would cast me such a lively, bright
and lovable smile as she did when I went for my morning ride?
The sad news of the death of Kum Sun perturbed the
revolutionary masses in the Wangqing area. A solemn ceremony in
her memory was held in Yaoyinggou. Enraged young men and
women from all the counties of east Manchuria joined the Korean
People’s Revolutionary Army in swearing to take revenge upon
the enemy.
A magazine connected with the Communist International and
Chinese and Japanese publications vied in reporting the
achievements of this young heroine unprecedented in the history of
the liberation struggle of the oppressed nations in the world. Her
heroic life was retold under the title of Short Biography of a Young
Girl Martyr. The skylark of the guerrilla zone, Kum Sun, who had
tirelessly crossed many torrents and mountains on her tiny feet,
thus shook the world at the age of nine.
In the modern history of our country there is a famous patriotic
girl martyr, called Ryu Kwan Sun. The mention of her name
recalls the March First Movement of the year 1919. The girl was a
scholar at the Rihwa School in Seoul, but she went back to her
native district in Chonan, South Chungchong Province, when the
school was forced to close in the wake of the March First
Movement; there she organized a demonstration for independence
and led it from the front before being arrested by the Japanese
gendarmes.
The court sentenced her to a heavy penalty of 7 years’
418
imprisonment. In view of the fact that the terms of servitude given
to 33 people who had initiated the movement were 3 years at the
maximum and 1 year at the minimum, and the fact that some of
them had been found not guilty, we can see how seriously the
Japanese judiciary regarded the 16-year-old girl’s case of felony.
Even the peasants in remote areas were aghast, saying that seven
years was the longest term of penal servitude in the history of the
March First Movement. When she had died in the Sodaemun
prison, our nation dubbed her the “Joan of Arc of Korea” and she
is still remembered with warm affection.
No such a title has yet been conferred on Kum Sun. For there
are no girl heroines of her age and no other girls who have
performed exploits comparable to hers. That our nation has a girl
heroine such as Kum Sun in addition to Ryu Kwan Sun, the
heroine of the March First Movement, is our nation’s distinctive
source of pride and glory. A novel and film depicting Kum Sun
have been produced recently, but this is not enough to preserve all
her exploits for posterity. It would not be too much to erect a gold
or bronze monument to young heroes or heroines such as Kum
Sun.
Kum Sun died at the age of nine, but she is immortal. Though
her life was short as a flash of lightning, she had reached the acme
of mental development and set a perfect example of an honourable
life. While there are many people in the world who have lived for
a hundred years and left nothing worth mentioning to their nations,
at the age of nine she performed an undying exploit that will be
419
enshrined in the hearts of coming generations.
It can be regarded as a meritorious deed of the Korean
communists to have raised this young heroine of world renown. In
the flames of the anti-Japanese revolution we communists trained
many children into young heroes and heroines, including Kim
Kum Sun, Jon Ki Ok, Mok Un Sik, Kang Ryong Nam, Pak Myong
Suk, Pak Ho Chol, Ho Jong Suk, Ri Kwang Chun, Kim Tuk Bong
and others. They were all young martyrs thrown up during the
tempest of the anti-Japanese revolution.
“Don’t kill me by shooting, but with bayonets, and send the
bullets to the guerrilla army.”
This was what Jon Ki Ok, a member of the Children’s Corps in
Hunchun, who was arrested by the enemy while transmitting a
message, said to the puppet Manchukuo policemen in the last
moment of his life at the execution site. Even the firing squad was
moved by his noble revolutionary spirit in placing the guerrilla
army and victory in the anti-Japanese war above his own life and
health even amid the dreadful tension and fear of death just prior
to execution.
This brilliant feat by the mere boy, Mok Un Sik, is worth
broadcasting to the whole world. On his way from
Yongchangdong to Pinggang, carrying a secret message in his
straw sandal, he was interrogated by the enemy at a guard post on
the Jiqing Pass. The guards who were desperately searching his
body for secrets suddenly tried to pull the straw sandal off his left
foot. At this he pushed aside the self-defence corps man who was
420
interrogating him and rushed straight into the post, where he thrust
his right leg into the oven–the message was in the straw sandal on
his right foot. The enemy, realizing the reason for his action, beat
him to a pulp in the attempt to draw him away from the oven. But
despite the enemy’s kicks and blows, he kept a firm grasp of the
oven and did not take his foot out of fire. His straw sandal, his foot
and his trouser leg were all burned. The enemy took him to a
hospital and gave him an injection to bring him round, for he had
lost consciousness. Their attempts to extract secrets from him were
truly unrelenting. But Mok Un Sik breathed his last without
revealing the secret he kept in his mind.
All the members of the Children’s Corps and the Children’s
Vanguard who assisted in the anti-Japanese armed struggle were
heroes and heroines, representing the youngest element of the first
generation of our revolution.
Our revolution still regards the Children’s Union, along with
the League of Socialist Working Youth, as a dependable reserve
for the Workers’ Party. This is why we build our palaces for
children with all the precious things in the country and spare
nothing for the education of the younger generation. I still tell the
officials today to take loving care of the younger generation, and
emphasize time and again that the children are the kings of our
country. A revolution which does not love and care for the
children has no future. It is foolish to expect that such a revolution
will attain its glorious ideal.
Today an epidemic of hedonism is cutting a wide swath across
421
the rest of the globe. The extreme egoism of caring only for
oneself and not thinking about the younger generation has
encroached very far upon the minds of many people. Some of
them do not have children, alleging that they are a nuisance, and
others give up the thought of marrying. Needless to say, it is a
matter of personal choice whether one gets married or has
children. But what pleasure is there in living without the younger
generation?.
The revisionists, who are addicted to extreme egoism and
hedonism, are not taking care of the younger generation; they are
disarming them spiritually and exposing them to all sorts of social
evils. If the teenagers wail and lament at the chaos of reality, and
bear a grudge against their parents, people in power and the world
in general, then the revolution of that country has no future or its
prospects are at best gloomy.
But when the officials spare no time, money, passion or effort
for the sake of the future generation, our revolution will produce
more children like Kim Kum Sun, Jon Ki Ok and Mok Un Sik.
As the family of a famous revolutionary, Kum Sun’s family
suffered terrible ordeals in the maelstrom of the anti-Japanese war.
Her father, who was the head of the underground revolutionary
organization in Wangougou, was falsely accused of being a
member of the “Minsaengdan” and was killed. Her mother died a
heroic death in the battlefield, fighting with a rifle in her hands to
defend the guerrilla base. When her father was alive I gave him
many difficult secret assignments. He was a man of strong will
422
who carried through the tasks he had been entrusted with to the
end. Five members of her family, including herself, were killed.
How very similar their fate is to that of Ryu Kwan Sun’s family!
This cruel and merciless destiny, however, did leave an heir to
the lifeblood of this laudable family. The girl’s two-year-old
younger brother, whom her mother had left in the care of villagers
before she went to her death in the battlefield, miraculously
survived.
It was Kim Jong Il, Secretary for Organizational Affairs, who
identified Kim Kum Sun’s younger brother and reported it to me.
At that time her brother, Kim Ryang Nam, was working as a music
compiler at the documentary film studio after graduating from the
university of music and dance. He had read in some publication
that his father was executed on a charge of involvement in the
“Minsaengdan,” and this knowledge had distressed him. He had
been afraid that his father’s dishonourable death might cause a
public scandal.
I assured him that his father had been a faithful revolutionary,
not a member of the “Minsaengdan.”
From then, he worked as an official of the Party Central
Committee, giving guidance in the field of art and literature and
energetically assisting Secretary Kim Jong Il in his work. Like his
sister, he was endowed with musical talent and intense ardour. The
cowboy of yesterday, who plaintively lamented the surging sorrow
of a ruined people on a grass harp, devoted his heart and soul to
creating operas from the original revolutionary musical art.
423
Kim Ryang Nam was one of the people who rendered
distinguished service in the creation of the Mansudae Art Troupe
and its development into one of the world’s first troupes under the
personal guidance of
Secretary Kim Jong Il. In February 1971, the Mansudae Art
Troupe gave a historic first performance in the Western
Hemisphere, in Cuba, thousands of miles away from our
motherland. At that time, Kim Ryang Nam was guiding the troupe
as deputy head for political affairs.
Secretary Kim Jong Il always felt pity for Kim Ryang Nam’s
sad past: as the only heir to Kim Kum Sun’s family, who had been
nourished on other women’s milk and spent his childhood and
boyhood as other’s servant. Kim Jong Il took particularly loving
care of him, as though he were his own flesh and blood. When he
contracted a fatal disease, Kim Jong Il organized an efficient
medical team to provide him with intensive medical treatment
round the clock; he also transmitted his diagnosis to our embassies
in foreign countries in order to obtain adequate supplies of
expensive medicines, and sent special airplanes to countries which
were said to have a developed pharmaceutical industry.
Kim Ryang Nam underwent operations 10 times and this
intensive care lengthened the span of his lifetime by almost two
years.
Kim Ryang Nam died at the age of 40, which means he lived
more than four times as long as his sister. But measured with the
standard of our times, when there are so many people who live to a
424
great age, his lifetime was short and he died too early. The ancient
philosophy which says that “The good die young” must be
regarded as out of keeping with the principles of life for the sake
of many Kim Kum Suns and Kim Ryang Nams who are still living
in this world. Kim Ryang Nam’s second son recently graduated
from the faculty of composition of the Pyongyang University of
Music and Dance, which his father attended, and began creating
musical pieces for the Mansudae Art Troupe. He is now singing
the same revolutionary songs his grandfather, grandmother, aunt
and father used to sing.
In this way our revolution, pioneered in blood by the
forerunners, is inherited and wonderfully improved through the
generations. Though Kum Sun is dead, her mettle and soul are still
alive pulsating in the minds of the younger generation powerfully
as they did in the days of her innocent childhood when she was
romping about the valleys in Macun and Yaoyinggou.
425
CHAPTER 9
The First Expedition to
North Manchuria
The Korean People’s Revolutionary Army
 The Haves and the Have-nots
Crossing the Laoyeling Mountains
 The Sound of the Mouthorgan
Ringing across Ningan
The Snowstorm in the Tianqiaoling Mountains
In the Bosom of the People
October 1934–February 1935
426
1. The Korean People’s
Revolutionary Army
It is elementary political knowledge that where there are people,
there is a state and where there is a state, there is an armed force.
Except for a few such special countries as Monaco, nearly all
countries, large and small, have their own national armed forces
for self-defence. The reason why many small and weak nations
surrendered their sovereignty under the threat of a few volleys of
gunfire from the colonialists and were obliged to become their
slaves for hundreds of years was that they had had no armed forces
or very weak ones.
The armed force of Ri dynasty, too, was annihilated, it was
incapable of defending the country. This armed force, which had
been so heinous in the suppression of rebels, reviled the foreign
aggressors for some time, but did not fire a single gun before
yielding. The ruin of our country can be ascribed to this inefficient
armed force as well as to the corrupt government.
In order to win back the sovereignty of the country, the patriots
of Korea organized the Independence Army. It is inevitable that
427
the nation which has been deprived of its sovereignty will organize
its armed force for its restoration. The nationalists organized the
Independence Army and conducted armed resistance for many
years, and the Korean communists organized the guerrilla army
and dealt a heavy blow at the Japanese imperialist aggressors. Our
small secret armed force, which started the long march of the antiJapanese struggle, had now developed into an army with a
regimental force in each county in Jiandao.
After repulsing the enemy’s winter “punitive” operations, we
realized very keenly the need to reorganize the Anti-Japanese
People’s Guerrilla Army into a people’s revolutionary army and
we discussed this matter seriously with the commanding officers
of the guerrilla units in other regions. In the light of the prevailing
situation merging the guerrilla regiments in the different counties
into a single command was a pressing need, and the natural course
of development of the AJPGA itself. Reorganizing the AJPGA
into the Korean People’s Revolutionary Army was a revolutionary
measure which would improve its combat efficiency and counter
the large-scale offensive of the Japanese imperialists more
effectively by providing a unified command for the enlarged
guerrilla forces. At the meeting at Mingyuegou the need for a large
revolutionary force became the subject of our discussion. When
discussing the future of the AJPGA there, we agreed that at the
initial stage we should organize guerrilla battalions, develop their
quantity and quality for some time, and then in due course
reorganize them into a larger revolutionary force. Of course this
428
matter was not a major item on the agenda at that meeting.
However, the delegates had heated discussions about the future of
the revolutionary armed force both within and outside the meeting.
The most ardent proponents of the idea of large revolutionary
forces were O Pin and Pak Hun.
It is a common practice in colonies or semi-colonial countries
for the armed forces of resistance to be organized on a small scale
initially, expanded with gradual stealth and, when conditions are
ripe, unified into a command. At the initial stage, when it returned
from exile in Mexico, Fidel Castro’s unit had 82 soldiers, of whom
only 12 men survived. These people, equipped with seven rifles,
went into the Sierra Maestra Mountains, developed their strength
by expanding their ranks, and then attacked Havana, toppling the
pro-US dictatorial regime of Batista as swiftly as lightning.
In the latter half of 1933, the merger of the guerrilla forces in
Jiandao into a unified command became a major topic of
discussion as a result of the lessons of Operation Macun for
repulsing the enemy’s winter “punitive” operations and the heroic
battle fought in defence of tens of thousands of square miles of
territory.
At the meeting to review operations, it was not the commanders
of the 2nd company and 3rd company, who had fought with us
throughout the 90-day defence of Xiaowangqing, but company
commander Han Hung Gwon, who had been far away from the
zone of operations, who spoke fervently about the need for
cooperation between various companies and the merger of units.
429
Han Hung Gwon said that the mission of his company in
Operation Macun had been to contain a possible enemy advance to
east Manchuria across the Laoyeling, but his company had not
fought a single battle with the enemy, rendering no assistance to
the main force in fighting. In other words, he implied that his
company had not been able to attack the enemy from behind as it
should during the enemy’s “punitive” attack on the guerrilla zones.
I thought a lot as I listened to his speech. His speech was selfcritical, but he was not to blame in any way. He was an efficient
commander who had carried out his mission in a responsible way.
Why did he criticize himself as being a commander lacking in
dedication, revolutionary principle and insight? In short, what was
he attempting to emphasize during the review? While he accused
himself of shortsightedness, I, as his superior, drew a serious
lesson from Operation Macun. The lesson was that, in order to
organize harmonious cooperation between companies in
accordance with the ever-changing combat situation, we needed an
adequate command and staff structure and this required a unified
system of command. His opinion was, after all, that the people’s
guerrilla forces against the Japanese should be merged into one
well-regulated command system.
Throughout the fight to frustrate the enemy’s attack the
guerrilla forces, operating separately in many places, fought
separately, without any cooperation with their neighbours or any
assistance from them.
In Helong County, for instance, the enemy was said to have
430
launched his “clean-up” of the guerrilla base in Yulangcun in early
November 1933. His first attempt had been checked for some time
by a fierce counterattack and his second “punitive” operation had
lasted only for three days, from the end of November. That was all
the fighting they had there. As the time of action shows, the
enemy’s “punitive” operations in Yulangcun had started about 15
days earlier than his attack on Xiaowangqing. If at this time the
guerrillas in other counties, who had not been engaged, had
attacked the enemy’s rear on the principle of mutual assistance, it
would have been much easier for the guerrillas in Yulangcun to
repel the enemy.
The circumstances in Yanji and Hunchun Counties were much
the same.
What did this mean? It showed, though belatedly, that since the
guerrilla zones were subject to enemy attack at different periods,
all the guerrilla forces could have made their struggle easier by
coordinating their actions through efficient cooperation, if only
they had had a unified command and staff system for the guerrilla
units in all guerrilla zones and counties.
However, in the circumstances of that time, when the guerrilla
units were directed within the framework of each county and each
district, such voluntary, active cooperation was impossible. The
command system of the guerrilla army at the time of the enemy’s
winter “punitive” operations was therefore limited in its response
to the demands of the situation. Until that time the guerrilla units
were under the command of the military departments of the party
431
committees at various levels. Since the battles in the early days of
the guerrilla movement, when only one or two companies existed
in each county, were fought on a small scale, this system of
commanding the army on a district and county basis was not so
bad.
However, as the ranks of the guerrilla army expanded and the
enemy’s “punitive” forces multiplied from hundreds to tens of
thousands, it became impossible to choose to fight only smallscale battles. A battle is not always fought by the choice of one of
the belligerent forces. When the enemy provoked us to battle by
continuously reinforcing his forces, we could not but fight against
him.
While the enemy was attacking us in large numbers by
mobilizing this or that division, this or that brigade and this or that
regiment from several directions, we were scattered in this valley
or that one and we fought, without either combining our forces or
helping our neighbours; should we be obliged to continue to fight
in this way in the future, too? When attacking a large city or a
town, we concentrated our forces by selecting men from each
county; why should we fight defensive battles with a county or
guerrilla zone as our unit of force? This was the idea that obsessed
me before and after Operation Macun.
In a nutshell, the guerrilla movement required a new form of
armed force corresponding to the content and scope of the
movement. It was necessary for us to take radical measures to
bring the armed units dispersed in the counties and districts under
432
a single system. The quickest way of meeting this requirement
was to merge the anti-Japanese people’s guerrilla forces into a
large revolutionary army.
A letter from the commander of the 4th company in
Yaoyinggou also seemed to suggest this. Circumstances prevented
the commander from attending the summing-up meeting of
Operation Macun, so he reviewed the work of his company in a
letter and sent it to Macun. O Jin U, the company commander’s
orderly, brought that letter to us. During the review of Operation
Macun I gave deep thought to the matter of merging the antiJapanese people’s guerrilla forces.
I discussed it with Ju Jin, Ryang Song Ryong and others on
several occasions.
Once I went to Ryang Song Ryong’s house and played the
guitar there. I did not do it because I was merry or free from
anxiety. Frankly speaking, I felt gloomy at that time. Though
Operation Macun had ended in victory for us, the guerrilla zone
was suffering heartbreaking anguish. Many people who had shared
their life and fate with us had been killed. It was not easy to
rebuild houses on the ruins and make a new life.
When I visited Ryang Song Ryong to discuss military matters,
he greeted me with a gloomy face. The battalion commander of
yesterday was still furious with anger for he had been detained on
a false charge of being a member of the “Minsaengdan.” Thanks to
our guarantee, he had not been given a prison term, but he had also
not been reinstated in his former position. He was operating
433
between Xiaowangqing and Luozigou to obtain food grain; after
being bereaved of his wife and mother by the enemy’s “moppingup” operation, he had become a man of few words.
When I brought up the matter of organizing a large-scale
revolutionary army, he immediately lit up and expressed
exceptional enthusiasm. He said, “I think the point in question is
just how to merge the units.”
He said nothing about whether he agreed or disagreed with me,
but he expressed his approval by bringing up the possible means
and forms of merger for discussion. What worried him most was
whether some people of a chauvinistic mentality, who were crazy
about the anti-“Minsaengdan” struggle, would accept the idea.
It was no wonder that he should feel uneasy about it. This was
the painful position the Korean communists found themselves in,
and the special circumstances required that the difficulties be
smoothed over prudently.
In those days “international lines,” formulated on the basis of
their own principles and according to their own yardsticks for
assessing all the problems of the communist movement and the
national liberation struggle, were imposed upon us as authoritative,
while national traditions and aspirations were sharply attacked as a
nationalist tendency, in the name of so-called class interest and
international solidarity. In this situation, it was not easy for the
Korean communists who were building up their revolution in a
foreign country to put into practice a plan for establishing their
own independent armed force.
434
Ju Jin also approved of the idea of merging and reorganizing the
anti-Japanese people’s guerrilla forces into a large revolutionary
army. As soon as I broached this matter, Ju Jin, who was openhearted and generous, gesticulated forcefully and said that we
should merge our units and fight big battles. I was very much
pleased by his words about “big battles.” It was very pleasant to
hear such words from Ju Jin, a gallant man whom the Korean
people in Jiandao loved and valued as one of their own. He went
on to say that when the Koreans organized an independent
revolutionary army by merging their armed units, they would be
accused of “extending the revolution to Korea,” but they should
push ahead with this work as quickly as possible without paying
any heed to such accusations.
Tong Chang-rong also supported our plan. He said: The AJPGA
organized in east Manchuria is an armed force formed on the
initiative of the Korean communists and Koreans form the
overwhelming majority of its ranks; though it was organized on
the territory of China, it should ultimately develop into a Korean
revolutionary armed force for carrying out the Korean revolution.
Tong Chang-rong’s evaluation was very fair and progressive at
a time when the very mention of the Korean revolution was
stigmatized as nationalism.
As he rightly pointed out, the Korean communists, such as Ri
Hong Gwang and Ri Tong Gwang in south Manchuria and Ho
Hyong Sik, Kim Chaek, Ri Hak Man and Choi Yong Kun in north
Manchuria, to say nothing of those in east Manchuria, had played
435
the roles of pioneers, advocates and leaders in the building up of
armed force in the region of Manchuria, just as they had taken the
lead in building up the party organizations there. And the
overwhelming majority of the commanding officers and men of
the armed force were Korean communists.
Tong Chang-rong advised me that, when forming an army, we
should employ appropriate forms and means so as to support and
supplement each other and consolidate our cooperation with the
Chinese communists and that, by doing this, we would bring
benefits both to Korea and China.
Pan, the inspector from the Comintern, gave full support to our
idea, saying that it was a correct policy in keeping with the line of
the Comintern.
Everyone capable of logical reasoning, from Ryang Song
Ryong, who led the Wangqing battalion with me, to Ju Jin, who
later became the commander of the 1st Independent Division of
the Korean People’s Revolutionary Army, Tong Chang-rong, from
the east Manchuria ad hoc committee, and Pan, inspector of the
Comintern, reached a full consensus on the policy of merging and
reorganizing the anti-Japanese people’s guerrilla forces into a large
revolutionary army. And we were in general of the same opinion
concerning the name and nature of the armed force which would
be reorganized.
In March 1934, we formally proposed the policy of
reorganizing the AJPGA into the Korean People’s Revolutionary
Army, in full accord with our objectives and the character of the
436
political force which would struggle for them.
The names used by the AJPGA in some areas of east Manchuria
in its early days—the Worker-Peasant Guerrilla Army—had
placed extreme emphasis of its class character, and it did not
conform with the character of our revolution, the primary task of
which we had defined as national liberation and independence
before social emancipation, nor did it conform with the character
of the revolution in northeastern China directed by the Chinese
communists.
As a preparation for reorganizing the anti-Japanese guerrilla
forces into the people’s revolutionary army, the Korean
communists in east Manchuria, shoulder to shoulder with the
Chinese communists, developed the guerrilla battalions in each
county into regiments. In this way, all the guerrilla forces in
Jiandao were regrouped into five regiments. In every regiment we
set up a political department, whose mission it was to give party
guidance to the army, a staff in charge of operations,
reconnaissance and communications, and a supply department
dealing with clothing, food and medicines.
The Wangqing regiment was the first to be reorganized and this
was followed by others in east Manchuria. That was the first stage
of reorganization.
The objective we set at the second stage was to form divisions.
During the days of Operation Macun we had felt very keenly
the need to form divisions. Offering resistance to a large armed
force of 5,000 men with only two companies was a feat
437
unprecedented in the history of war. As we broke through the
difficulties created in the guerrilla zone by harassing the enemy
with a small unit behind his lines, I used to think how happy we
would be if we had forces on the divisional level, if not on the
corps level, and how high our spirits would be if we conducted
activities with large units and fired thousands of guns as one force!
Since regiments had already been organized in each county and
their ranks were expanding quickly, the next thing to do was to
form divisions without delay. That was the most important task of
the moment.
Our objective was to organize first two divisions and one
independent regiment under the Korean People’s Revolutionary
Army and then build on this success more divisions in the future.
With this objective in mind, we organized a division out of the
regiments in Yanji and Helong, and another division made up
mainly of regiments in Hunchun and Wangqing.
In the course of this reorganization, the party committee of the
Korean People’s Revolutionary Army was established as a new
party guidance body. The party committee was entrusted with the
onerous task of giving guidance to local party organizations as
well as those in the army, because the local party organizations
could not protect or maintain themselves if they were not
supported by force of arms. In earlier times local party
organizations had guided the party organizations in the army.
The work of reorganizing the AJPGA into the Korean People’s
Revolutionary Army was carried out in a very short space of
438
time—from March to May 1934.
When they heard about this, the people in the guerrilla zones
vied with each other in helping the army and prepared grand
celebrations in every zone. The women in Wangqing made
congratulatory banners and sent them to us; the YCL organization
there staged a congratulatory performance by the children’s art
troupe and organized an athletic meet. In Sandaowan guerrilla
zone in Yanji, a mass meeting and a demonstration attended by
more than 1,000 people were held and delegates from the enemycontrolled areas participated in those events. The people were even
further convinced of the bright future of national liberation by the
formation of the KPRA, and they firmly resolved to rise up as one
body with the army in the anti-Japanese revolutionary war.
The reorganization of the AJPGA into the KPRA opened up a
broad highway towards the development of large-force operations
in a wider area. Had we not reorganized the AJPGA into the
KPRA, or had we not created in good time the large units of
regiments and divisions, we could not have lit the torch in
Pochonbo, which illuminated the darkness of the motherland, nor
won victory after victory in the battles fought in Fusong,
Jiansanfeng, Hongtoushan, Limingshui, Taehongdan, Hongqihe
and in other places in the homeland and in Manchuria, when we
annihilated the enemy’s crack troops. Nor could we have smashed
the notorious siege imposed by the enemy upon the guerrilla zones
after his “punitive” operations.
Through this reorganization we clearly demonstrated at home
439
and abroad the will of the Korean nation to liberate their
motherland by an armed resistance, no matter what the cost.
If circumstances required, the KPRA operated in the name of
the Northeast People’s Revolutionary Army. We were of the
opinion that the word “northeast” did not suggest the name of a
country, but, to all intents and purposes, was suggestive of a
region. That the KPRA operated in the name of the Northeast
People’s Revolutionary Army, not in the name of the Manchurian
People’s Revolutionary Army or the Chinese People’s
Revolutionary Army, was also compatible with the objectives of
the Chinese comrades who were struggling against both
Manchukuo and Japan. After all, the Northeast People’s
Revolutionary Army performed its mission as the KPRA and, at
the same time, as a revolutionary armed force rendering support to
the anti-Manchukuo, anti-Japanese cause of the Chinese
communists.
The KPRA developed into the most powerful armed force in
Jiandao, the eastern frontier region of Manchuria, and the region of
the Korean peninsula centring on Mt. Paektu.
The principled stand and prudent political magnanimity the
Korean communists had shown in the course of reorganizing the
AJPGA into the KPRA contributed greatly in subsequent years to
the development of the joint anti-Japanese struggle of the Korean
and Chinese peoples, and particularly to the development of the
armed struggle against the Japanese in northeast China. If we had
insisted on an inflexible form and name corresponding only to the
440
Korean revolution, in disregard of the prevailing subjective and
objective situation of that time, the Korean communists would not
have launched the anti-Japanese armed struggle in such an
effective way, with the extensive support of the Chinese people.
When in later years we organized the Northeast Anti-Japanese
Allied Army, we called it by this name when operating in the
northeastern region of China—as its character required—and
changed its name to the Korean People’s Revolutionary Army—in
conformity with the specific situation—when operating in areas
inhabited mostly by Koreans or in the homeland, so that we lived
and fought under the care and protection of the Korean and
Chinese peoples everywhere we went.
Even from today’s perspective, we consider it a matter of
honour and pride that we placed greater emphasis on the essential
content of the movement than on any of its formal aspects. Thanks
to this principled view and magnanimous stance, we were always
able to hold fast to the national character and independence of our
struggle, while fulfilling our duty as internationalists and, for this
reason, we enjoyed the respect and support of the Chinese
comrades and the Communist International.
Publications of those days called the people’s revolutionary
army organized in Jiandao the Korean People’s Revolutionary
Army, not as the Northeast People’s Revolutionary Army. The
Dongfang Zazhi (Oriental Magazine—Tr.) published by the
Shangwu (Commercial) Publishing House in Shanghai in 1935
wrote, in connection with the guerrilla struggle in northeastern
441
China, that there was a 3,000-strong Korean People’s
Revolutionary Army in Jiandao, and this was faithfully reprinted
in the Lives of the Anti-Japanese Martyrs in Northeast China,
published by the National Salvation Publishing House in Paris,
France.
It is therefore no wonder that the KPRA was called the 2nd
Army Corps after the Northeast Anti-Japanese Allied Army was
formed in the later years. The KPRA was, by its nature, an
international body of the anti-Japanese allied front of the Korean
and Chinese peoples, and the Koreans in the 2nd Army Corps
supported the liberation struggle of the Chinese nation under the
banner of internationalism, while carrying out their own task of
struggling for the independence of Korea.
It was the Japanese imperialist forces of aggression which most
feared the formation of the KPRA and its victories in battles in
Jiandao, and clamoured most loudly about the danger its existence
would cause. In most cases they called our anti-Japanese armed
force in east and south Manchuria “Kim Il Sung’s army” instead of
using its official name.
After the AJPGA had been reorganized into the KPRA, the
Anti-Japanese Volunteers’ Army in Jiandao, led by Kong Xianyong, Chai Shi-rong, Shi Zhong-heng, Li San-xia and others, was
united with the KPRA, which was renamed the 2nd Army Corps,
in order to achieve success in the anti-Japanese joint struggle; this
new formation was also called the “Northeast Korean-Chinese
People’s Revolutionary Army.”
442
In the course of these events, a solid alliance of the antiJapanese armed forces of Koreans and Chinese was virtually
realized in east Manchuria in the first half of the 1930s.
In one of his articles, Zhou Bao-zhong wrote, “The 2nd Army
Corps of the Anti-Japanese Allied Army was, at the same time, the
‘Korean People’s Revolutionary Army.’... In the course of the antiJapanese guerrilla war the Chinese and Korean peoples maintained
ties sealed with blood for the sake of their common cause.” Thus
he recognized the entity of the KPRA and extolled the alliance of
Korean and Chinese armed forces against the Japanese that existed
in the course of the historical common struggle.
In this sense the Japanese called the guerrilla army organized in
Manchuria, and in Jiandao in particular, the “pure Korean
partisans.”
According to the data uncovered by one of our comrades, V.
Rappoport, a famous expert on Chinese and Korean affairs in the
Soviet Union, contributed an article under the title of “The Partisan
Movement in the Northern Area of Korea” to the Soviet
international political magazine The Pacific in 1937, in which he
stated: “The partisan army in Korea has mostly been merged into a
unified command, has its own centre and calls itself the people’s
revolutionary army.... The expansion of the existing relationship
and contact between the Korean and Manchurian partisan armies is
setting the Japanese militarists atremble with great unease and, for
this reason, Japan is paying serious attention to the border area of
Korea.”
443
The reorganization of the AJPGA into the KPRA did not mean
a mere change of name or a technical restructuring. It meant a new
stage of army-building, of improving the command system of the
guerrilla army and strengthening its ranks both in quantity and
quality by following up on its successes and drawing on its
experiences after reviewing the path of militant advance traversed
by the AJPGA.
After reorganizing the AJPGA into the KPRA, we launched
unceasing military actions to frustrate the enemy’s siege.
The headquarters of the Kwantung Army and the military
authorities in Tokyo, who had suffered defeat in the winter
“punitive” operations which they had flaunted as the final
“mopping-up,” made a great fuss over determining the cause of
their failure and deciding who would be answerable for it; then in
the spring of 1934, they re-examined their previous scorched-earth
tactics and proposed a plan which they called a siege, an even
more notorious, new plan for “clean-up.” It was an atrocious
operation intended to wipe out the guerrilla zones for good by
combining military siege and attack, political suppression and
economic blockade. We regarded this new invention of the
Japanese as a replica of the blockade policy Jiang Jie-shi had
pursued when attacking the Soviet zones in China.
While Jiang Jie-shi’s blockade policy had been aimed at
denying the communist army clothing and food “by producing a
subhuman world filled with political terror and economic crisis,”
the Japanese siege was aimed at killing all the people and soldiers
444
in the guerrilla zones by shooting and burning and imposing on
them death from hunger and cold. To this end, they tried to
separate the army and people by building concentration villages
and to detect and eliminate all the forces of resistance through the
introduction of such medieval collective security systems as the
ten-household joint responsibility system and the five-household
joint surveillance system.
The blockade policy and siege were similar to each other in
their tactical aspects. Jiang Jie-shi’s tactics were to refrain from
hasty pursuit or from deep penetration after encircling the enemy
but to occupy a position and consolidate it slowly, studying the
means of holding it, then proceed to an attack of another position.
The tactics of “step-by-step occupation” invented by the Japanese
can be compared with Jiang’s tactics.
Commenting on this, our comrades said, “How wretched the
Japanese are! They have to learn from Jiang Jie-shi.” This
comment was more than just a joke.
In his preparations for the siege from the spring of 1934, the
enemy moved a greater number of crack troops of the Kwantung
Army and his occupation army in Korea to the areas around the
guerrilla bases and reinforced them with puppet Manchukuo army
troops.
To cope with a threatening situation in which the enemy was
deploying his forces for the purpose of siege, we ensured that the
KPRA forces forestalled his attempt by assaulting his military and
political strongholds one after another from behind in large-scale
445
operations, while fighting in defence of the guerrilla zones and, at
the same time, expanding the guerrilla zones to more favourable
areas. This enabled us to manage the difficult situation on the basis
of our initiative, consolidate the victories won at the cost of our
blood, and maintain the people’s high revolutionary spirit.
The KPRA launched a spring offensive. We raided the areas in
Wangqing where the enemy forces were concentrated and the
constructing sites of the concentration villages at Xiaobaicaogou,
Daduchuan, Shitouhezi and Zhuanjiaolou. Our comrades in
Hunchun, Yanji and Helong also attacked the construction sites of
the concentration villages, smashing the enemy’s attempt to
establish a siege in its very first stage.
In order to consolidate the success achieved by the spring
offensive and, maintaining the initiative, turn the enemy’s
attempted siege into a fiasco, we immediately launched a summer
offensive. The main purpose of this effort was to expand the
guerrilla zones to the northwestern area of Antu County and
northeastern area of Wangqing County. Defending a few fixed
guerrilla zones while the enemy surrounded us would mean falling
into the trap laid by the enemy and assisting his efforts.
The task of expanding the guerrilla zone to the northwestern
area of Antu County was entrusted to the 1st Division and the
Independent Regiment of the KPRA and the task of expanding it to
the northeastern area of Wangqing County to the 2nd Division of
the KPRA. While the area of guerrilla activity which connected
Dadianzi and Fuerhe was the lifeline of Antu County, the area
446
including Luozigou, Laomuzhuhe, Taipinggou and Sandaohezi
was the lifeline of Hunchun and Wangqing Counties. Being
adjacent to the Mudanling and Laoyeling Mountains, these areas
were considered ideal for guerrilla activities, and had been
developed by veteran soldiers such as Hong Pom Do, Choe Myong
Rok, Ri Tong Hui and Hwang Pyong Gil since the days of the
Independence Army movement.
We made a plan under which Ju Jin, commander of the 1st
Division, and Yun Chang Bom, commander of the Independent
Regiment, were to attack the Dadianzi-Fuerhe area first, so as to
draw the enemy’s attention, and then we were to advance in the
direction of Luozigou.
While the attention of the Japanese Kwantung Army was
focused on the area around Dadianzi, Antu County, as we had
planned it should be, a part of the 4th and 5th Regiments of the
2nd Division of the KPRA and the Chinese nationalist army units
advanced to Luozigou and occupied Sandaohezi and Sidaohezi. In
Sandaohezi a joint meeting of the KPRA soldiers and 1,500
officers and men of the Chinese units was held. The meeting was
in the spirit of an ideological campaign for victory in the battle at
Luozigou. Participating in the battle from the side of the Chinese
nationalists were units led by Kong Xian-yong, Shi Zhong-heng,
Chai Shi-rong and Li San-xia.
Luozigou was a strategic area for the enemy, for it connected
Baicaogou in Wangqing County and the Dongning county town.
Hundreds of puppet Manchukuo army soldiers led by Wen Chang-
447
ren, a battalion commander, were stationed there. It had originally
been a moderate-sized town of about 500 households, but it had
rapidly developed into a military stronghold of the enemy after the
September 18 incident, and had become an important base for the
Jiandao task force since the spring of 1932. When the task force
was withdrawn, the Japanese imperialists shipped a heavily
reinforced battalion for use in their siege operation.
Occupying the Luozigou area by means of a preemptive attack
was the fundamental link in the overall chain of our efforts to
create the conditions for lifting a corner of the siege and expanding
new guerrilla zones.
At the house of old man Ri Thae Gyong in Sandaohezi we held
a meeting with the leaders of the Chinese units to discuss the plan
of operations.
Ri Thae Gyong was a man of high patriotic spirit who had
served in both the Righteous Volunteers’ Army and the
Independence Army. Working with Choe Ja Ik, he had once been a
general affairs director of the northern political and military
administration. It was said that So Il had nominated him, a simple
rank-and-file soldier, as director, because he had been charmed by
Ri Thae Gyong’s exceptional marksmanship and calligraphy.
When So Il had preached the Taejong faith, worshipping Tangun,
the old man had become a faithful follower of the faith; when Kim
Jwa Jin had insisted on the struggle against communism, the old
man had supported him and received a revolver from him as a
reward for his support. When Kim Jwa Jin had evacuated his
448
forces to north Manchuria just before the large-scale Japanese
“clean-up” in Jiandao, Ri Thae Gyong had followed his seniors as
far as Mishan. But after Kim disappeared into the deep forest in
Daomugou, Yanji County, he had come to Sidaohezi with his
colleagues, buried his weapon, and taken up farming.
The impression of the old man that I can still recall is from
when I unfolded a sketch map of the streets of Luozigou to explain
the operational plan to the leaders of the Chinese units, and he put
a stone on a corner of the map, the corner by the window of his
house, lest the map should flap in the wind. The family of Ri
called it a blessed stone. It was a peculiar stone, shaped as smooth
as an egg. The old man said that when he was a director of the
administration in Shiliping a friend of his had given that stone to
him before he died, left a will saying he would be blessed if he
kept it for a long time.
That stone is now kept in the Korean Revolution Museum.
Before he died, the old man handed the stone over to his son to
keep as a family treasure, saying that General Kim Il Sung had put
it on his operational map and touched it and that he should keep it
well. When a group of visitors to the old battlefields of the antiJapanese armed struggle went to the northeastern region of China
in 1959, his son handed the stone over to them. Though he said he
disliked communism, the old man spared nothing to help us.
I met this old man for the first time in the summer of 1933
through the introduction of Choe Jong Hwa, the head of the AntiJapanese Association in Luozigou. I had gone to Sandaohezi on
449
horseback and was conducting political work among the people
there. At that time I had organized an Anti-Japanese Association in
Sandaohezi and accepted the old man, who was the elder of the
village, as a member of the association. After joining the
association he had educated the villagers well and all the villagers
had done what he, the elder and the most influential man in the
village, had told them to do.
It was more easy to transform a village on revolutionary lines if
at least one or two members of the Righteous Volunteers’ Army or
the Independence Army were living there. For the most part,
former soldiers of the Independence Army who, like Ri Thae
Gyong, had given up the fight halfway and buried their weapons,
retained their patriotism. When they, the hardcore elements, went
around one household after another, calling on people to help the
revolutionary army soldiers who were suffering in the mountains,
everybody responded positively. When the people were asked
what they should do when the soldiers came to their village, they
replied, “We should cook rice cakes,” or “We should kill a calf.”
Some of the former Independence Army soldiers had betrayed
their cause, but such people were few. The vast majority of them
led an honest life to their last moment. For this reason, I was
careful not to neglect work with the influential veterans of the
Independence Army wherever I went. Before anybody else I
visited such Independence Army veterans as O Thae Hui in
Shixian, Choe Ja Ik in Xidapo, Ri Chi Baek in Macun, Kim Tong
Sun in Dongricun and Ri Thae Gyong in Sandaohezi, greeting
450
them and lying down, heads on wooden pillows, beside them to
talk over current affairs.
After liberation some people gave the cold shoulder to the
veterans of the Independence Army, alleging that their ideology
was different from ours. In those days people with ideologies other
than communism were rejected out of hand. At times, narrowminded people in the area of personnel administration would give
them a wide berth, and such rash responses acted like a wet
blanket on the united front policy we had consistently adhered to.
Whenever I encountered such people, I would say to them, “It is
wicked to ostracize the Independence Army veterans on the
grounds that they have different ideology. It is their limitation, but
not grounds for guilt, that the soldiers of that army did not become
communists. Are you trying to make communists of Chun Hyang
and the young nobleman Ri9? Even if we are in power, we
communists must not fail to appreciate our patriotic seniors. The
trend of thought differs from age to age; then why do you ostracize
them, guard against them and avoid them? Are they guilty for
fighting for Korea’s independence at the risk of their lives when
others were living with their families in warm houses, eating hot
rice? I think that the veterans of the Righteous Volunteers’ Army
and the Independence Army who fought under arms are more
laudable patriots than those who had led a comfortable life in their
own houses while earning their own bread. You should realize that
you will be forsaken by the people if you ostracize the
Independence Army veterans.”
451
On the basis of this view, we enrolled the sons and daughters of
the martyrs of the Independence Army in the school for bereaved
families of revolutionaries which was built at Mangyongdae. We
appointed veterans of the Independence Army who actively
supported our line of building a new Korea to official posts
according to their abilities. Mr. Kang Jin Gon10, the first
Chairman of the Central Committee of the Peasants’ Union of
North Korea, and Mr. Ri Yong11, the Minister of City
Management of the first Cabinet of the DPRK, were veterans of
the Independence Army.
While we were preparing for the battle after the meeting, our
reconnaissance party informed headquarters that the enemy had
rushed out of the walled town in order to forestall our attack. We
lured the enemy out to a point favourable to us and then destroyed
his main force, and by pursuing the fleeing enemy we launched
our attack on the walled town. Our combined forces had to fight a
hard battle in the pouring rain.
The greatest obstacle in the battle at Luozigou was a fort on a
west hill just as in the battle in the Dongning county town. The
battle went on for three days because of the enemy’s desperate
resistance from the fort. As we were holding a meeting at the
headquarters of the Chinese units on the third day, a mortar shell
from the fort caused wounds, some of them serious, to some of the
commanders of the Chinese units, including Zhou Bao-zhong.
Zhou was participating in the battle as the chief of staff of Kong
Xian-yong’s unit. Dispirited by the wounds suffered by their
452
commanders, some of the Chinese units began taking to flight in a
disorderly manner, running directly away from Luozigou. If this
retreat were not checked, the battle would end in failure. The
capture of the fort on the hill would be decisive to the outcome of
the battle. Not only mortars but several heavy and light
machineguns were mounted on the fort. Shots from this fort fatally
wounded the company commander, Han Hung Gwon, in the
abdomen, so that his intestines came gushing out, and Jo Wal Nam
was also put out of action. Han’s wound was so appalling that he
himself requested us to shoot him.
To the KPRA soldiers who were pinned down so that they
could not approach the fort but only grind their teeth in vexation, I
shouted, “Comrades, we must seize the fort at any cost. Let us
fight for the revolution to the last drop of our blood!”
Then, mowing the enemy down with Mauser fire, I charged
forward. The rain of machinegun bullets from the fort grazed my
ears. A bullet pierced through my cap. But I dashed forward
without pause for breath. The men sprang to their feet and
followed me. The fort which was boasted to be impregnable fell
into our hands in 30 minutes and a red flag was hoisted on top of
it.
The soldiers of the Chinese units who saw that flag turned
round and launched an all-out charge in high spirits. The selfsacrificing spirit of the Chinese communists, including Zhou Baozhong, was highly influential in arousing them from apathy and
frustration to charge. Though wounded heavily, Zhou blocked the
453
soldiers’ flight with open arms and shouted at them to look at the
red flag flying on the fort on the west hill. The soldiers who saw
him stopped their retreat and assaulted the enemy position, raising
a loud battle cry.
The battle ended in victory for us.
Wen, the battalion commander of the puppet Manchukuo army,
and the Japanese instructor, who were defending Luozigou, said in
the last despairing message they sent to the commander of the
Kwantung Army that they had been surrounded and under attack
by 2,000 troops of the combined forces of Kim Il Sung’s army and
other units for six days and five nights and that they were on the
brink of being annihilated. They wailed, “Our ammunition has run
out and our fate will be decided in a moment. But we are proud of
having done our best for the sake of Japan and the building of
Manchukuo. Mr. Commander, please understand this and forgive
us.”
Our victory at Luozigou and Dadianzi was the greatest of all the
victories the KPRA won in the early days of the anti-Japanese war.
The KPRA’s attack on Luozigou dealt a heavy blow at the enemy
in his attempt to besiege us and struck mortal terror into his heart.
After this battle the enemy’s large and small “punitive” forces
deployed in the vicinity of the guerrilla bases were paralyzed with
fear.
Indeed, the battle at Luozigou reduced the enemy’s power in the
northeastern region of the Wangqing guerrilla zone, creating a
situation favourable for expanding the guerrilla zones and making
454
a great contribution to the further consolidation of the allied front
with the Chinese nationalist armed forces. After the battle we
continued brisk political and military activities to thwart the
enemy’s attempts at siege. When the guerrilla zones were
evacuated many of the revolutionary people in east Manchuria
were able to settle down in the areas around Antu and Luozigou
because we had turned this region into an invisible revolutionary
base through intense military and political activities from the early
days.
The KPRA sacrificed much blood during the summer offensive
in 1934. The victory in the battle at Dadianzi was stained with the
blood of Cha Ryong Dok, a popular commander of working class
origin, who was one of the organizers of the Helong guerrilla unit
and the political commissar of a regiment. He was the first
political commissar to fall in action after the formation of the
KPRA.
455
2. The Haves and the Have-nots
The guerrilla base was my home and secure nest, but I did not
always stay there.
An army which is cooped up behind a fence will invite tactical
self-destruction.
Consuming the people’s provisions and gadding about the
Xiaowangqing valley went against the grain. We were also
disgusted by the doings of the Leftists and chauvinists who
destroyed innocent people on their own side by labelling them as
“Minsaengdan.”
I used to go to fight behind the enemy lines in command of my
unit whenever the situation permitted me to do so. After the semiguerrilla zones were set up, I did this more frequently.
The people liked us to do this because they knew well that our
actions behind the enemy lines would bring them rice and clothing.
However the enemy might slander communism, the people did not
believe him if we once stayed with them overnight. The
personalities of the communists, expressed in their morality and
manners had a stronger effect on the people than the enemy’s
456
propaganda.
Men who had had interesting experiences in the enemy-held
area vied with one another to accompany me.
I used to take the 5th company with me. Taking too many men
could mean problems with food and attract too much attention to
our activity, so I kept my company between 50 and 60 men. When
more men were needed, I used to call on the 1st company. As I
frequently operated behind the enemy lines, Choe Chun Guk, who
was in command of the 2nd company, and Jang Ryong San who
was in command of the 3rd company, earned the burden of
defending Wangqing. The 4th company defended Yaoyinggou.
The 5th company was the crack unit in Wangqing. If they were
ordered to march with an interval of three steps between men, they
did so; when ordered to suppress the sound of their breathing, they
did so. We used to hit a moderate target and then withdraw five or
a dozen miles like lightning, avoiding major commitment.
Our harassing operations behind the enemy lines prevented the
enemy from committing all his forces to the attack on the guerrilla
base.
Some officials in charge of Party propaganda work after
liberation gave no publicity to the experience of the Korean
communists in fighting behind the enemy lines during the war
against the Japanese. Instead, they propagandized only the
traditions and experience of a foreign country. The flunkeyist fever
spread by these people developed to such an extreme that
immediately after liberation our people were not even aware that
457
there had been a heavy battle fought for the defence of
Xiaowangqing during the anti-Japanese war, though they knew all
about the battle of Stalingrad and tank battle at Kursk. At one time
the Hero Ri Su Bok12 was called the “Korean Matrosov.” At the
time of the Fatherland Liberation War our people believed that
Matrosov of the Soviet Union was the first hero in the world ever
to block an enemy pillbox with his own body. They were totally
ignorant of the fact that Kim Jin, one of the anti-Japanese martyrs
of their own country, had done this much earlier than Matrosov.
If we had educated people in our revolutionary traditions
immediately after liberation, many of them would not have been
killed during the temporary wartime retreat. They could have
formed small units of five to six people or 15 to 20 people, each
carrying an axe and one or two mal (a mal approximates to two
pecks—Tr.) of rice, and moving from mountain to mountain, firing
several shots now and then and posting up leaflets; in this way
they could have endured one month or two in mountains. But such
education was not given in advance, so during the war we incurred
losses that could have been avoided.
Most of my activity behind the enemy lines was conducted in
the rural villages in the area on the Tuman River. In one year I
travelled by rail in the area along the Tuman River and I could
recognize the mountains and ravines across the river, which looked
exactly the same as in the old days.
As the saying has it, the darkest place is under the candlestick—
it was a good choice to operate under the very nose of the enemy.
458
Our unit advanced to a mountain at the back of Tumen. We all
operated in plain clothes there. We posted a sentry on the top of
each of three hills, and carried on our operation without haste,
reading and sleeping in the forest. The enemy had no idea there
was a guerrilla unit operating under his very nose.
In the summers of 1933 and 1934 we operated around Tumen
and Liangshuiquanzi on the Tuman River. While I was conducting
mass political activities in the vicinity of Liangshuiquanzi
following my return to Wangqing after the negotiations with Wu
Yi-cheng, I had sent some of my men to the Tumen area and I
myself had talked to the local inhabitants with a view to finding a
suitable place for my headquarters. In general, they recommended
three places, Mt. Songdong, Beigaoliling, and Caomaodingzi, as
ideal; in fact, these places provided safety for the headquarters but
were unsuitable for the purposes of our activity.
Something attracted me to the mountain at the back of Tumen.
As I travelled to and from Onsong, I had thought it resembled
Moran Hill in Pyongyang. I examined the place on the map and
found it ideal for our purposes.
It had several ravines and dense forests, which made it an ideal
place to spend the summer in improvised grass-thatched huts. Our
organizations had been active in many places around this mountain
since 1930, but there were still many villages where we had no
organizations. Our intention was to turn these virgin villages into
revolutionary ones.
I had intended to go to the mountain at the back of Tumen as
459
soon as the Luozigou battle was over. But I had to put off my
departure and stay at Xiaowangqing for a while, since I had to
obtain food and clothing for a Chinese anti-Japanese nationalist
army unit. It was already the beginning of hot period but the men
of the Qingshan unit were still wearing worn-out cotton-padded
clothes and barely managing to survive on potatoes the size of
sparrows’ eggs. In consequence, the potato fields around the place
where the troops were stationed had been all ravaged. The owners
of the fields resented the Qingshan unit. Relations between officers
and men, who were ill-fed and ill-clothed, had naturally
deteriorated, and the unit was turning into a gang of bandits. Some
of them showed signs of wishing to surrender. The state of affairs
in Kaoshan and Shi Zhong-heng’s units was much the same. At
that time Kaoshan unit had not yet been admitted to the KPRA.
We attacked Gayahe in cooperation with the Qingshan unit and
divided the captured food and clothing among the Chinese antiJapanese nationalist army units and made another raid on the
enemy in Diaomiaotai before we set off for the mountain behind
Tumen. On my arrival at the mountain I found Han Hung Gwon,
the company commander, had arrived before me. In the battle at
Luozigou he had been wounded in the belly so heavily that his
guts had fallen out of his abdomen, and he had been sent to
guerrilla hospital. Now he had slipped away from hospital and had
been secretly following our company.
The wound in his belly had almost healed up during the past
month, but the marks of the suture were still reddish. Afraid that
460
his scar might split again, I ordered him go back to the hospital.
This giant of a man pleaded with a tear-stained face not to be sent
back. So I instructed the acting company commander, Comrade
Wang, to take good care of him even on the mountain, so that the
wound would not be aggravated.
The original name of Tumen was Huimudong. It was a village
where the Koreans had built huts and baked lime. The place was
surrounded by limestone mountains.
The Japanese imperialists who occupied Manchuria after the
September 18 incident extended the Jilin-Hoeryong railway from
Chaoyangchuan to Huimudong and named the terminal Tumen.
They built houses around the station, set up a branch office of the
Japanese consulate, built a police station and a customs house and
stationed a garrison there. Thus they had turned the quiet village
which had existed on limestone into a crowded town of consumers
constantly pestered by army and police. The new street was named
Tumen and the old village at the foot of the mountain to the west
retained the old Korean name of Huimudong. A railway was soon
built across the border between Tumen and Namyang. From then
on, Tumen was an eastern gate protecting the Japanese concession
in Manchuria. On the opposite side of the river lay Namyang, an
important town on the route connecting Korea and Manchuria.
In the latter half of the 1930s, Japanese intelligence services
involved in preparing for aggression against the Soviet Union
made their base in this town. As we have seen above, Tumen was a
place of considerable military and political significance.
461
In many respects it was an advantage for us that Tumen became
a base for our activity and an important point on the route to the
semi-guerrilla zones in the homeland.
We had formed an organization in Huimudong in the early days
of our activity. This organization was under the influence of O
Jung Song. When I crossed the river to Onsong in September 1930
I was helped by the comrades from Huimudong and when I went
to Jongsong in May the next year I also received assistance from
them. It was with the help of this organization that Choe Kum Suk
had obtained apples and pears to tempt my appetite when I was ill.
Tumen, a transit point which connected us with Onsong, could
in effect be called a supply base for the guerrillas.
The objective of our operations on the mountain at the back of
Tumen was to frustrate the enemy’s scheme of “severing the
people from the bandits.” In those days the enemy called the
revolutionary army “communist bandits.” The Japanese
imperialists made it their policy to isolate the revolutionary army
from the people and strove frantically to achieve this. They
devised various schemes, namely, an ideological conversion
operation, the policy of concentration villages, the ten-household
joint responsibility system, the five-household joint surveillance
system, and surrender operations.
Under the tyrannical policy of “severing the people from the
bandits” many of our organizations were destroyed and the people
began to panic. Some people went so far as to sign surrender
applications. This tendency was most glaringly evident in the
462
southern part of Wangqing on the Tuman River.
We promulgated a slogan—Let us frustrate the enemy’s
isolation scheme by the unity of the people and the army!—and to
implement it we set out to restore the organizations among the
masses. We restored the organization in Nanyangcun where O
Jung Hup was living, and we also formed new organizations with
the Choes, based in Dalazi. After completing this work in the
adjacent villages, we gradually moved towards Liangshuiquanzi,
working among the masses, and infiltrating the lumberjacks and
peasants. Once I led a small group to Xiongjidong, Mijiang,
Hunchun County by way of Solgol, and re-established the
organizations in Kyongwon (Saeppyol) and Hunyung across the
Tuman River. As we did this, those people who had been
distressed by the enemy’s isolation scheme became active as their
ties with the revolutionary army were strengthened.
During our operations from the mountain behind Tumen, I
frequently visited the area of the six towns in the homeland in
order to improve the guidance system of grassroots-level party
organizations and other revolutionary organizations in various
parts of the homeland and extend the work of building the party
deep into Korea.
Since the formation of a party organization on Turu Hill in
Onsong County in October 1930, a number of basic party
organizations had also been created in the areas along the Tuman
River through the efforts of hardcore members of the party
leadership such as O Jung Hwa, Kim Il Hwan, Chae Su Hang, O
463
Pin and the political workers, Ri Pong Su, An Kil, and Jang Kum
Jin. Many basic party organizations had been set up in Hoeryong,
Yonsa, Unggi (Sonbong), Musan, Kyongwon (Saeppyol), Rajin,
Puryong, Sinam-dong in Chongjin and other places.
In August 1933, a training course on underground party work
was given in Paksokgol, Kyongwon (Saeppyol) County. The twoday training course, which was conducted under a tree near a
charcoal kiln in Paksokgol, was attended by political workers and
those leaders of underground revolutionary organizations who had
been working in the northern region and other parts of Korea. The
lectures on the building of underground party organizations were
given by me, on questions of YCL work by Jo Tong Uk, on
women’s work by Pak Hyon Suk, and on Children’s Corps work
by Pak Kil Song.
It was about this time that a meeting of representatives of party
and other revolutionary organizations in the homeland was held
under our guidance in Onsong. The meeting took place in
Jinmyong School in Phungin Workers’ District (the present name
of the place), Onsong County in February 1934. The main topic of
discussion was expanding party organizations into wider areas of
the country, and establishing the system of guidance for party
organizations. The meeting also decided to establish regional
organs of guidance such as district party committee.
As a result of this decision the Onsong district party committee
headed by Jon Jang Won was formed. The meeting was important
because it marked a turning-point in expanding the work of party
464
building in the homeland in the first half of the 1930s.
At that time Joson Ilbo (the Korea Daily—Tr.) reported that
“The party meeting held in Jinmyong School decided on a few
radical slogans and circulated them in print.” The report gave a
brief impression of the meeting.
The operations on the mountain behind Tumen gave rise to
many amusing anecdotes.
I still remember one story about a stingy landowner who was
made to pay dearly for his niggardliness. I do not remember the
name of the village where the landowner lived, but it was certainly
a Korean village.
One day I let the soldiers take a rest on the mountain at the back
of Tumen and went down in plain clothes to the village where this
landowner lived. At that time civilian wear was not a suit in the
western style but Korean clothes. We always carried these clothes
in our rucksack. Without wearing these clothes it was impossible
to work in the enemy-controlled areas. Those who spoke fluent
Japanese carried Japanese clothes.
That day I was accompanied by my orderly Ri Song Rim and
two other men.
It was late afternoon, and we had a few hours till sunset. I
wanted to sound out the feelings of the people in the village, which
we had not visited yet. I was also feeling bored after living in the
mountain for days at a time. I intended to ask for help and form an
organization in the village if the villagers were well-disposed.
There were no Japanese soldiers or policemen there.
465
We made for the largest, most imposing house with a tiled roof
and I asked if the master was in. There was no answer and the door
was locked from the inside in the middle of the day. We took the
handle of the gate and rattled it. Only then did we hear someone
coming out, dragging his shoes lazily. A middle-aged man opened
the gate and cast a frowning glance at us. This was the landowner
who would be taught a lesson.
“Sir, we are travellers. It’s getting late and we’re looking for
lodgings. Will you be kind enough to let us stay overnight at your
house?” I asked him politely.
The master spat abusive language at us, calling us crazy. He
was unpleasant and ill-tempered.
“Why have you chosen to come to this house in the village?
There is an inn a little over a mile from here. Do you think this is
the village mill?” His manner of rolling his eyes and shouting
abuse betrayed an ugly temper. Without any preliminaries he
denounced us as crazy and treated us with contempt, as if we were
beggars. I felt indignant. But I was tolerant and said politely once
again, “Sir, I have pain in my legs and blisters on my feet. So I can
walk no farther. Let us stay overnight here, please.”
He yelled back at us, foaming with rage, “I say the inn is not far
from here. Why do you cling to me like a leech? I haven’t even
met you bastards at a fair.”
My orderly, standing behind me, begged for the man to have
mercy on me. “Master, we have no money to pay for the inn. It is
said that God blesses the kind-hearted. You could pretend that you
466
are treating us to a feast, you may....”
“Do you want me to give you money?” he cut the orderly off in
mid-speech and spat, “What nonsense!” He shut the gate and
disappeared inside.
This was the first time I received such treatment in ten years of
revolutionary activity. There were many rich people in central
Manchuria, where I had been engaged in underground activity.
None of them was as cold-hearted as this landowner.
My orderly was quivering with rage. He had never imagined
that his commander would be treated so badly by such a worthless
country landowner. He suggested shooting the brute. He said he
would at least like to fire a blank in his ear to scare him into
fainting.
I, too, was on fire with rage. It is only natural that fellow
countrymen should become more friendly when they meet in a
foreign land. Even people whose lives set them against each other
in their own land share a feeling of fellowship in a foreign land.
This is the nature of human beings. The landowner who insulted us
by calling crazy had not an iota of compassion.
Could human nature become spoilt in this way because the
country had been ruined? There is a saying that misery loves
company.
No nation is so compassionate as the Koreans. That is why we
have the saying: an evil spirit cannot resist ritual prayers, a human
being cannot resist compassion.
Koreans are especially hospitable to visitors, and this is a virtue.
467
It is the kind-hearted custom of our people to accord cordial
hospitality to their visitors. Although the head of our family was
only a grave keeper, our family had always been kind to its
visitors. If we had a visitor when our provisions had almost run out
and we had to live on gruel, my mother used to add a bowl of
water to the gruel pot so that the visitor might share the meal with
us. In those cases, my mother and my aunt used to eat the thinnest
portion of the gruel.
Even though the women of my family might skip one or two
meals, they never complained about the family’s poverty or
misfortune. This was the true image of the Korean nation, which
was engraved in my heart in my boyhood.
Since ancient times people in this country had been so
hospitable that even a penniless man could have travelled
throughout the country if he had chosen to. That is why foreigners
who have been guests in an ordinary Korean home have spoken
highly of our country as an eastern country of great courtesy.
Was it not Korean blood, then, running in the veins of that
wicked landlord? How could he be so cold-hearted towards a
fellow man?
He was immoral.
A nation whose power has decayed can be dispossessed of its
country. A people without a country can be deprived even of their
written and spoken languages and their surnames. But how can
they discard their kind hearts? If all of the people were to become
brutes like this landowner, the Korean people could never win
468
back Korea.
It is fortunate, however, that only a tiny handful of Koreans
were like the landlord.
I was obliged to revise my views of the rich.
In the summer of 1933, a unit of the Chinese national
salvation army stationed in Shiliping made a raid upon Shixian
and, as one of the operations for collecting economic
contributions, held a wife of a Chinese rich man for ransom.
She had had her feet tightly bound to keep her feet from
growing according to Chinese custom, and she had been
detained for a few days in her simple underwear in Shiliping.
The unit sent a notice to her husband informing him that if a
certain amount of money was brought before a certain date, his
wife would be sent back home. The rich man, however, did not
show up in Shiliping, saying that with that amount of money he
could get married to a prettier woman. It was her own father,
instead of her husband, who ransomed her. This showed what
the ill-tempered rich people were like.
We went around the village again to find a lodging. We decided
to ask for help at a thatched house instead of a tile-roofed house.
We saw a thatched house not far from the landowner’s house: the
members of the household were having supper with the doors of
the rooms wide open.
I spoke to the master of the house just as I had done to the
landowner. “Good evening, we are travellers. It is late and we are
seeking a lodging. Can we stay overnight at your house?”
469
He rose and looked out at us, resting his hand on the upright of
the door. “Come in and sit down. Join us in this humble gruel. We
apologize, but it is our only meal. Please, come in, though the
room is not in good order.”
“Don’t mention it. We are in no position to complain.”
He led us into the room. Even though the room was shabby, his
words and deeds showed how kind-hearted he was.
The husband asked his wife if there was another bowl of gruel.
She said yes. At this the thought came to me that people who live
in poverty were quite different. The common people possess good
hearts but the rich people do not. Their sincere invitation to join
them at supper moved both of us.
“What will you do if we eat your supper? All we need is a
lodging.” We declined the offer with thanks, thinking it too much
to eat their supper.
The man chided me for my refusal.
“There’s no such rule of etiquette in the world. Guests are
supposed to accept their host’s kindness. I’m afraid you are
declining it because it is not very tasty. But this is all we can offer.
Wife, bring a few more roots of leek and a plate of bean paste.”
The mistress did as told by her husband.
We were moved almost to tears by the warmth of their hearts;
they were treating us as if we were their own kinsfolk. I sat at the
table but the thought of the comrades standing guard on the
outskirts of the village prevented me from taking up my spoon.
“Thank you, master! I’ll eat it later. Help yourself first. Our
470
comrades are outside the village.”
“How many of you are still to come?” He looked worried as he
asked this. Naturally he was worried about more visitors coming,
because there was only one extra bowl of gruel.
“There are two more comrades and they have blisters on their
feet, they cannot walk. Master, they say there is an inn around
here, is it true?”
“Yes, certainly. It is about two miles away. How can they walk
all that distance with blistered feet? You should stay here tonight
and go there tomorrow morning, though you’ll have to share gruel
with us. Please bring the others here, too.”
I asked him what sort of a man the landowner was.
He replied that, in a word, he was miserly and ill-tempered and
added: “He has turned his back against the villagers but he is fairly
friendly with policemen and officials. A few days ago, a young
man who came from Korea to visit his relatives here, was arrested
for no particular reason and tortured almost to death at the police
station before being released and going back home. I suspect this
was the landowner’s work.”
Meanwhile, it had become dark.
I ordered the orderly to send the men on guard duty to bring the
men from the mountain, because we were going to stay the night in
that village.
Some time later, the company commander, Han Hung Gwon,
led the unit to the village.
At the sight of 60 to 70 soldiers entering the village, the
471
landowner realized something was happening and presented
himself to our comrades, flattering them and saying, “How can I
help you, sirs?” Then he fussed over the guerrillas and invited
them to his house. How can a man live that way, spending his
energy on double dealing?
Han Hung Gwon, not knowing his true motive, was very moved
and said to me, “Comrade Commander, that landowner is kindhearted, just like the landowner Jang in Xiaowangqing and the one
in Tumen.” The landowner Jang had given sincere assistance to the
guerrillas, but had been banished from the guerrilla zone to
Daduchuan by orders of the Soviet government. The Tumen
landowner was a conscientious man who had responded to our
request for cloth and cotton wool and other materials sufficient to
make 500 uniforms for the Chinese anti-Japanese nationalist army,
which was a difficult problem for us at the time. We made clothes
with that materials for all the soldiers of the Chinese anti-Japanese
nationalist army in Xiaowangqing.
The Tumen landowner used to come to Shiliping to visit his
relatives. Once our comrades somehow found out when he was
coming and detained him in order to collect funds. When we
returned from our operations behind the enemy lines, the comrades
in the headquarters had released him, saying that the method was
wrong. I sent for the landowner, who was fleeing from the
guerrilla zone and frankly explained to him the situation with
clothing for the Chinese anti-Japanese nationalist army and
appealed to him for help. He promised to help us and went back
472
home, and later he kept his word.
I briefed Han Hung Gwon on what had happened in the village.
“Comrade Han, don’t be deceived by flattery. He is an illnatured man who refuses to open his gate to a visitor.”
When he heard this he gave a hollow laugh of blank dismay.
Then, with his fist clenched in rage, he said:
“I see he is a wicked fellow. Such a man should not be forgiven.
Let’s try him and shoot him.”
I waved my hand to calm him down and stop him trembling
with rage.
“No, don’t do that. What is the use of executing a landowner?
That will only upset the public pointlessly. It would be better to
tell him not to lose his conscience as a Korean.”
“Then we must teach him a good lesson. That son of a bitch
should not be allowed to get away with it.”
“But you must not behave like bandits,” I warned him lest he
should go too far.
When Han Hung Gwon came to his house, the shrewd
landowner pressed himself close under his jaw and asked him who
was the commander. His intention was to let the commander and a
few other officers stay in his house, and do nothing for the other
men, because they would have to be billeted on several villagers
anyway. This cold-hearted man was quick in his calculations.
Han Hung Gwon introduced himself as the commander and
suggested slyly.
“This household seems to be fairly well off. I think we can stay
473
here for a month or two eating your rice. Even if we do, you will
not run short of food, will you?”
“Well, I cannot guarantee two months, but I can afford to take
care of you for a few days.”
The landowner’s face turned pale for fear that the guerrillas
might really stay in his house for two months.
With an air of indifference to the landlord’s anxiety, Han Hung
Gwon went on to say something that would really stun him.
“Master, how many pigs do you have in your house? Our men
have not tasted meat for several months. I think you have a pile of
a hundred sacks of rice in reserve, haven’t you, though I am not
sure about other houses?”
“Oh, my God, a hundred sacks you say? I’ve never had that
much. Even though the other houses pretend to be poor and eat
gruel, they all have enough rice.”
“Whether the others have rice or not, you should treat us. You
are rich, so you don’t need to worry about it. If you have any
conscience as a Korean, you must contribute your share to
achieving the country’s independence. You mean that we should
eat the rice of the poor people who are short of food? How can the
peasants farm if we eat up their seed grain?”
Intimidated by Han Hung Gwon, the landowner butchered pigs
and offered the men rice. The men who had been billeted on
peasants also ate rice brought from the landowner’s. If he had
treated us properly, he would have not suffered this misfortune.
After teaching him a good lesson, Han Hung Gwon returned to
474
me, bringing a rush mat and a quilt from the landowner’s to make
up my bed. He was a man who enjoyed playing such jokes on
people.
That night at the good-natured peasant’s house we had rice
which Han Hung Gwon brought from the landowner’s.
“Will there not be trouble if we do this?” the peasant asked me
apprehensively.
“Master, don’t worry,” I assured him, “there is nothing for you
to worry about. You have only lent us your cooking pot. If the
landowner finds fault with you later, tell him that you had nothing
to do with what the guerrillas did.”
“If you are guerrillas, I can set my mind at ease. It was foolish
of me not to recognize you as guerrillas.”
 The man and his wife had not known who we really were. Out
of their simple kindness as Koreans they invited us to share
whatever they were eating, whether it was gruel or bean paste. But
the landowner was devoid of such courtesy. If a Japanese
policeman had come to see him, however, he would have flattered
him, offering him a cushioned seat.
This was how the rich differed from the poor. But not all the
rich people were cold-hearted or totally lacking in love for their
country. Jiang Wan-cheng, Jiang Wei-hua’s father, was a wealthy
landowner, but he was an ardent patriot of high reputation. I must
also speak highly of the wealthy widow Paek13 because she was a
renowned patriot who spared no money for the enlightenment and
development of our nation. That is why she was later named Paek
475
Son Haeng (virtuous deeds—Tr.).
Most of the rich people, however, were miserly and coldhearted, like the landowner we met. There is some truth in the
saying that charity comes from the granary, but it does not always
apply. Was the peasant who treated us to barley gruel hospitable
because he had a large stock of rice? In fact he had nothing but one
sack of early-harvested barley in the corner of his room.
No matter how much money a man may have, he will be
forsaken by the world if he has no compassion. Even though one
lives in a hut, one can be morally rich, have many friendly
neighbours and be held in high esteem by everyone, if one is kind
to one’s fellows. If a man’s worth is judged by moral excellence,
the landowner who turned us away must be called a miserably
poor man not worthy of human respect.
In this case true virtue was found in a hut in which ordinary
people lived, not in a grandiose house.
Ri Pong Su and his wife once contracted an eruptive typhus
when they were working in Machang. At that time Ri Pong Su was
the head of a hospital, and his wife An Sun Hwa was working in
the hospital. She crawled out to bury their child, who had died of
starvation, and covered the body with oak leaves. Ri Pong Su had
a feeling that soon he might also die just as his child had. He took
off the new clothes which his comrades had brought him a few
days before, folded them neatly, and set his last will and testament
on them.
“These clothes have not been worn for long and I ask the
476
comrade who finds this testament to wear them in my place.”
This incident shows how superior the compassion of the
revolutionaries was to that of the landowner.
Ri Pong Su miraculously survived and continued to work for
the revolution, but his testament remained as proof of his humanity
and still moves the people’s hearts, an example of the noble and
warm world of humanity which only communists can create.
When we returned to the guerrilla zone from the mountain
behind Tumen, we gathered the soldiers together and told them
about our experience in the village.
“Look! This is a clear example of people’s class character. The
poor peasant invited us to share his gruel, whereas the rich
landowner drove us away from his gate, let alone inviting us to
share his meal. He is a wicked man, isn’t he? We must overthrow
the exploitative society in order to do away with such wicked
men.”
The incident was good material for class education. This story
about the rich landowner and the poor peasant became a common
topic of conversation in the villages on the Tuman River. People
who were told the story condemned the landowner as a wicked
man and praised the peasant as a kind-hearted man. When our
plain clothes squads approached the vicinity of a village, the young
people from the village came out to them and informed them
which households were rich and which families had cattle
belonging to the “People’s Association.”
In those days the cattle of the “People’s Association” were
477
raised in rural villages. After Japan occupied Manchuria, the
“People’s Association,” a reactionary organization, had
distributed its cattle among peasants to be raised. The animals
were raised by peasants but did not belong to them; when they
were fully grown, they had to be returned to the association. It
was a mechanism for exploiting the peasants’ labour. These
animals had seals on their horns.
When they said that certain families had these oxen, the young
people of the village meant that the guerrillas could slaughter them
for meat without damaging the people’s interests. The guerrillas
picked out these oxen and butchered them. The Japanese became
frantic at this, saying that the villagers were all bad people: How
could the communist army know which houses had been raising
the cattle of the “People’s Association”? The people of the village
must have informed them.
The peasants would answer them, “How could we know? We
know nothing about it. They have a list. We could do nothing to
stop them, they picked them out from the list.”
Long experience had bred in my bones the feeling that the
richer people were, the more cold-hearted they were, the more
devoid of virtue. Wealth which is opposed to goodness and
morality itself is not a source of virtue but a trap which swallows
and destroys virtue. The landowner in the village on the Tuman
River hurt me deeply. Because of him, my impression of the
village was not good.
The incident hardened my resolve, when the country became
478
independent, to wipe out the old society of immorality and
corruption, in which the landowners and capitalists lorded it over
others, and to build a beautiful and sound society where all the
people would live in harmony like one family, with no gulf
between the poor and the rich.
We are striving to make all our working people rich, not to have
rich people who live in luxury, growing fat on others’ sweat and
blood, but materially and morally rich people who are honest,
industrious, and create social wealth by their own labour. We
cannot tolerate a capitalist society in which money is all-powerful.
When an era in which everyone enjoys equitable material and
moral wealth is ushered in, humanity will be free from all social
evils for ever.
479
3. Crossing the Laoyeling Mountains
We returned to the guerrilla base when our activities in the
enemy-controlled area were over, but we had to leave Wangqing
with the knapsacks still on our backs. Zhou Bao-zhong in north
Manchuria sent a messenger to us, requesting our assistance.
I took his request very seriously. He was a Chinese friend and
comrade-in-arms who had fought for the common cause in close
liaison with me since we had worked together on the anti-Japanese
soldiers’ committee. The Luozigou battle had deepened my
friendship with Zhou. He was ten years older than I. I regarded it
as a noble internationalist duty to meet his request and made hasty
preparation for an expedition to north Manchuria.
One day in late October 1934, when snow was falling in large
flakes, the 170-strong expeditionary force of three companies
selected from the soldiers in Wangqing, Hunchun and Yanji, left
Duitoulazi and set out to cross the Laoyeling Mountains.
Nature is a mysterious force. Mountain ranges bound countries,
and divide provinces and counties. Sometimes a mountainous
barrier marks off differences in the levels of development of
480
politics, economy and culture.
Laoyeling is a steep mountain range that demarcates east
Manchuria from the north and south of Manchuria, north Jiandao
from east Jiandao, and east Jiandao from west Jiandao. The
features of the terrain on its northern and southern slopes present a
sharp contrast. The southern side is a series of steep hills, whereas
the northern side is a boundless expanse of vast plains such as can
only be found in the Honam area, the southwest of Korea. Most of
the people living in east Manchuria south of Laoyeling were from
North Hamgyong Province, whereas many of those living north of
Laoyeling were from North and South Kyongsang Provinces.
From the point of view of the level of ideological
consciousness, the people in north Manchuria rather lagged behind
those in east Manchuria. Consequently, the revolutionary
enthusiasm of the people was also not as high as it was in east
Manchuria. One day Zhou Bao-zhong confessed that the work of
enlightening the north Manchurian people politically was more
difficult than that of awakening the east Manchurian people. This
was a serious problem faced by the north Manchurian communists
in their activities. If we lightened their burden even a little, it
would be conducive to the harmonious development of the
revolution in northeast China.
We had planned large-scale operations in the south and north of
Manchuria, as well as in east Manchuria and the homeland. Giving
our best efforts to cooperation with neighbouring units was the
policy which we had maintained from the very start of our
481
struggle. This was why we considered a meeting with Ri Hong
Gwang and Ri Tong Gwang to be one of the main objectives of
our march into south Manchuria and strove hard to achieve it.
Helping north Manchuria also meant helping Kim Chaek, Choi
Yong Kun, Ho Hyong Sik, Ri Hak Man, Ri Kye Dong and other
Korean communists who were waging a guerrilla struggle in this
area.
The expeditionary force seethed with excitement from the very
start. The prospect of a new place always arouses a rainbowcoloured fancies. What is more, the men were mostly aged 18 to
20, and therefore most curious and eager for adventure. As I led
the unit, I felt the same pride and joy as they did.
But from the moment the expeditionary force left Duitoulazi, I
was haunted by an uneasy feeling, which seemed to hobble my
steps. The farther away from the guerrilla zone we went, the more
uneasy I became.
I was on my way to north Manchuria, when the guerrilla bases
in east Manchuria were not yet completely free from enemy
encirclement. The long-term special peace-maintenance scheme
was a massive programme of “punitive” operations which the
Japanese imperialists had worked out in order to encircle and
overcome us by means of a protracted war, after they had suffered
defeat by the summer offensive of the Korean People’s
Revolutionary Army. The main point of this programme was to
divide the year and a half from September 1934 to March 1936
into three periods and launch their offensives in places where the
482
public peace was comparatively secure, and continue until they
could crush the last stronghold of the people’s revolutionary army.
Their scheme of encroaching siege by means of expanding their
occupied area step by step over a long period of time could
effectively strangle and suffocate the revolution.
Of course, our expedition to north Manchuria would make a
great breach in the Japanese army’s scheme for the siege.
An equally serious danger threatening the guerrilla zones was
the ultra-Leftist anti-“Minsaengdan” struggle which was under
way throughout Jiandao. In complete contradiction of the original
goal set by the east Manchurian party committee, this struggle was
exploited to meet the ulterior purpose of certain ambitious
elements, position seekers, chauvinists and factionalist flunkeyists
in the leadership. Their manoeuvres were disintegrating the
revolutionary ranks from within and threatened the very existence
of the guerrilla bases.
The merciless iron club of a purge campaign punished faithful
and true revolutionaries and patriotic masses en masse every day,
without discriminating friend from foe. The majority of soldiers
and civilians in the guerrilla bases were suspected of involvement
in the “Minsaengdan” case.
Worse still, the spearhead of the anti-“Minsaengdan” struggle
was directed against Koreans, particularly against cadres and core
elements who were working in important positions in the party, the
army and mass organizations. The gun barrel of the purge was
always aimed at the leading officials, fighters and most active
483
workers whom the masses had trusted and followed. For example,
Ri Yong Guk, the secretary of the Wangqing county party
committee, was executed on a charge of being a “Minsaengdan”
member. Commander of the Wangqing battalion Ryang Song
Ryong, who was imprisoned and accused of being a
“Minsaengdan” member, and only released when I stood surety for
him, was still under surveillance. In this way, ambitious men and
schemers in Jiandao used the excuse of a purge campaign to plot
against true revolutionaries. Kim Myong Gyun, the head of the
military department of the county party committee, and Ri Ung
Gol, the secretary of the first district party committee, who were to
be executed, on charges of being “Minsaengdan” members,
escaped from the guerrilla zone.
When late October came, heavy snow fell and a strong wind
blew in Manchuria. From olden times the people in the north had
called this wind the Siberia wind.
On the day we left Duitoulazi, too, piercingly cold wind raged
as if to check our march over Laoyeling. The Laoyeling Mountains
looked like an arrow fixed to a bow. The name of the mountain
range can be translated as old man mountain range, and it
indicated a mountain range that was very high and steep. We spent
all day scaling it. Ri Song Rim complained frequently about the
steepness of the mountain.
As we were crossing the mountains Ko Pobae encouraged our
comrades greatly by displaying his talent. I have already
mentioned briefly that when Tong Chang-rong was in Longjing
484
prison, Ko picked a pocket in order to get himself arrested by the
police, and took a chance on meeting Tong in prison to inform him
of our opinion. He was extraordinarily quick with his hands, so
that he could, for instance, quite easily “steal” all the money in a
big market. He could have lived in luxury simply by exploiting his
skill, becoming richer than a millionaire, if he had set his mind to
it.
It was a mysterious yet truly laudable act for such a man to
come into the mountain and plunge into the crucible of the
revolution.
However, skill with his hands was only one of his talents. His
most wonderful achievements were his vocal dexterity and
comedy. Placing his hands on his lips, he could produce all kinds
of sound and he could twitch his face and set his eyes and lips
askew. When he played such farcical tricks, even Wang De-tai, the
2nd Army Corps commander, who was very blunt and unsociable,
would burst into roars of laughter with his mouth gaping open.
When he jumped about on one leg, with the other folded up,
nobody could help laughing.
When he strolled about markets and streets with a sack on his
back, singing a beggar’s tune, he looked like the most stupid of
men, so he was easily able to deceive the enemy.
He frequently employed this dexterity and the art of disguise
when he went to towns and villages to sound out the enemy. For
this activity he was known by the nickname Pobae (a treasure—
Tr.), apparently because he was as valuable as a treasure. Few of
485
his comrades-in-arms called him by his real name. Even I called
him by his nickname. His real name was not even widely known.
Some people said he was born in North Hamgyong Province and
others said he came from South Hamgyong Province or Kangwon
Province. Ko Pobae himself did not know where he came from.
When asked where he was born he would reply that he was
born in a coastal village of Korea. He did not know his native land
because he had come to Manchuria when he was a baby and his
parents died early. He was equal to any task because he had known
bitter toil since his childhood. He could do the work of a
blacksmith, a builder or a barber, if necessary.
For some time Ko Pobae acted as a messenger between the
north and east of Manchuria. He did not talk carelessly about what
he did and where. When his comrades asked him “What are you
doing nowadays, Comrade Pobae? Are you a guerrilla?” he said
yes. When they asked him “Are you an inspector?” he also said
yes. He always answered such questions with such a queer smile
that his comrades could not tell whether he was joking or being
serious. This was Ko’s peculiar way of keeping his duties secret.
Just as Ko Pobae followed and respected me unconditionally, so
I trusted and loved him absolutely. When we were scaling
Laoyeling, two Japanese biplanes came flying low over the peak
and then returned. Apparently the “punitive” troops who had been
chasing us had informed their headquarters of the whereabouts of
our expeditionary force.
On that day unusually heavy snow fell from morning to
486
evening. All the mountain ridges and valleys north of Laoyeling
were covered with such deep snow that we could not distinguish
one valley from another. To make matters worse, a strong wind
blew up in the afternoon, so that even Ko Pobae, who knew the
terrain as well as the front yard of his own house, was quite at a
loss as to which way to go, to say nothing of others who were
strangers to north Manchuria. We lost our way at a point 20 miles
from Badaohezi and halted our march. In the mercilessly pouring
snow and severe cold my men’s eyes were fixed on my face. Ko
Pobae, who had been so cheerful stood before me with stooped
shoulders, as if he had committed a crime.
“Every year some travellers lose their way and die, buried in
snowdrifts on this mountain pass. Last year, seven or eight soldiers
of the Chinese anti-Japanese nationalist army died on this strange
mountain. Perhaps we should turn back to a village and spend one
night there until the snowstorm dies down, before resuming our
march.”
He suggested this timidly, looking in irritation at the northern
valleys of Laoyeling, covered with white snow.
I did not accept his suggestion, because retreat in such a case
would have been utterly destructive.
“No, we cannot do that. You have nothing to be afraid of in a
place where you have worn out many shoes. This is Laoyeling, not
Haerbaling or Mudanling, so we have no other choice but to find
our way here. All we have to do is to go straight towards the north,
using my compass. You have nothing to fear. Brace up. Our
487
comrades in north Manchuria are waiting for us.”
My words heartened Ko Pobae. He forced his way through the
snow at the head of the column, making the sound of a motor
engine with his mouth. At the sound of the engine all the men in
the expeditionary force burst into laughter that reverberated across
Laoyeling.
We marched until the next day and found a small Chinese
village. Hardly had we entered this village, when the “punitive”
troops of the Japanese army which had been billeted on a
neighbouring village attacked us by surprise. So we fought our
first battle in north Manchuria.
The “punitive” troops of the Japanese army or the puppet
Manchukuo army in north Manchuria had never fought a battle
with the people’s revolutionary army. Their opponents were only
such rabble as local bandits or mountain rebels who would tremble
and turn tail at the sight of the Japanese army.
The Japanese “punitive” troops, who had been accustomed to
destroying their foes by simple pursuit, attacked us that day in
conceit, taking us for local bandits or mountain rebels. We quickly
occupied a hill and returned fire, dispatching a platoon to attack
the enemy from behind. The enemy was struck hard, and quite at a
loss what to do. In this battle the enemy suffered heavy casualties.
The news of this battle was spread far across north Manchuria by
the enemy. They created a great commotion, saying that laogaoli units
had come from east Manchuria. “They are brilliant fighters. Who on
earth commands the unit? It may be Kim Il Sung’s unit which
488
attacked the Dongning county town.” From that time on the
newspapers reported on our unit. In those days the enemy called
our guerrilla army “communist bandits” or the communist party, or
ambiguously, the anti-Manchukuo army.
The expeditionary force won the battle, but all the villagers had
taken refuge, so we found ourselves left totally without support,
with no way at all of obtaining food. If we were to stay in the
village until we found Zhou Bao-zhong, we had to know the
enemy’s movements. But we had neither an intelligence network
of our own nor any acquaintances. In such a situation it was
impossible for us to take the next step. Even Ko Pobae had no
knowledge of the whereabouts of the Ningan guerrilla army. We
left the village and spent one night in an unknown valley. The next
day Ko Pobae and O Tae Song went scouting and found Zhou
Bao-zhong’s camp. In that mountain camp I met Zhou, who was
under medical care, with 20 to 30 men under his command. A
wound he had received from a mortar shell in the Luozigou battle
had festered badly and had not healed even though months had
passed.
Zhou walked out, supporting himself on a stick, and assisted by
his men. He came quite a distance from the hut to meet us.
“As you see, I am still in bad condition,” he said, smiling sadly,
raising his stick, and then squeezed my hand tightly. “I am very
happy to meet you again like this. I hope you will give me a lot of
help.”
His greetings were short, but his voice and look showed how
489
much he expected from me.
My reunion with Zhou was an event which symbolized a new
chapter in the history of the anti-Japanese armed struggle. This
meeting marked the start of the full-scale joint struggle of the
Korean People’s Revolutionary Army and the guerrilla units led by
Chinese communists.
Just as we attached great importance to our cooperation with the
armed forces led by the Chinese communists, so the Chinese
communists in Manchuria were making every effort to implement
joint operations with the armed forces led by Korean communists.
When various Anti-Japanese Volunteers’ Army units such as the
anti-Japanese nationalist army, the national salvation army units,
the Red Spear Society and the Broad Sword Society were formed
in many places of Manchuria in opposition to Jiang Jie-shi’s policy
of non-resistance after the September 18 incident, and they
challenged the Japanese aggressors, both the Korean and Chinese
communists attached great importance to a united front with them
and made great efforts to bring it about. There is no need to repeat
here the great success we had achieved through tireless efforts.
After 1934 the activity of the Anti-Japanese Volunteers’ Army
gradually declined. When the Japanese had stepped up their
offensive, many commanders of the Anti-Japanese Volunteers’
Army had left for China proper, taking their units, and others had
surrendered or had become bandits. Some of the nationalists like
Shi Zhong-heng had converted to communism. The enemy called
such units of the Chinese anti-Japanese nationalist army “political
490
bandits.”
In this situation the anti-Japanese armed struggle in Manchuria
developed through the building-up of an army with a wellorganized administration, through an alliance between the AntiJapanese People’s Guerrilla Army led by Korean communists and
various anti-Japanese nationalist army units under the influence of
the Chinese communists.
Zhou said that the organization of the Ningan anti-Japanese
guerrilla army had not gone smoothly, and explained in detail. The
backbone of the Ningan guerrilla army consisted of the 20 antiJapanese soldiers who had followed him when he left Luozigou.
When the eastern area bureau of Jilin Province was dissolved
and the Suining central county party committee was organized,
Zhou had taken charge of its military department and started
raising an army, with his 20 men as its backbone. The ranks had
soon increased to 50 men when a unit of Korean guerrillas joined
his unit. After many negotiations his unit had merged with Ping
Nan-yang’s unit, which had its home base in the Erdaohezi area.
Zhou Bao-zhong had recommended Ping as the commander of
the merged unit and he had taken charge of military affairs.
Ping’s real name was Li Jing-pu. He was called Ping Nan-yang for
a profound reason. Ping Nan-yang meant “pacifying the south.” In
those days the Japanese aggressors were concentrated in the area south
of Ningan County. Li Jing-pu intended to fight a decisive battle with
the Japanese aggressors entrenched in this area. Thus his unit was
named the Ping Nan-yang unit and its commander Li Jing-pu was
491
called Ping Nan-yang.
As this anecdote shows, he was both courageous and patriotic.
But strong in his anti-Japanese sentiment and courageous as he
was, he suffered difficulties because of his undisciplined men. This
also bothered Zhou who, as the leader of the unit, held the real
power over it.
When he met me, Zhou requested me to work with Ping Nanyang in his stead.
“Ping Nan-yang is full of heroic aspirations, but he has a
friendly feeling towards you Commander Kim because he was
saved by a Korean communist.”
I said that, grateful as I was to him for his confidence, I felt my
shoulders burdened with a heavy responsibility. Zhou said with a
smile, “I believe only in your extraordinary influence, which
persuaded Commander Yu and Commander Wu.”
He was also worried about relations with the Chinese antiJapanese nationalist army units.
In Ningan County and its vicinity there were numerous small
and large AJNA units, many of which were hostile to the
communists. This was a great obstacle which the Ningan antiJapanese guerrilla army had to remove immediately if its
operations were to be successful. Daping, Sijihao, Zhanzhonghua
and Renyixia units, which made frequent appearances around the
centre of Beihutou west of Dongjingcheng, were AJNA units
which had once joined with Ping and later broken with him. These
units were hostile to the communists and, worse still, the Jingan
492
army urged them to surrender, driving an even greater wedge
between these units and the communists. It was difficult to predict
what they might become in the future. Shuangshan and Zhongyang
AJNA units, which were engaged only in banditry in the northwest
of Tongjingcheng, were under threat from the Jingan army. Jiang
Ai-min’s unit, the strongest of all the AJNA units, small and large,
in the Dangdaogou area, east of Ningan, was vacillating following
bitter experiences during a “punitive” operation by the 13th
brigade of the Japanese army.
The units under Jiang Ai-min’s command had once escaped to
east Manchuria, pursued by the 13th brigade. These units had been
plundering food and had eventually applied for surrender. Our
comrades had managed to dissuade them from surrendering.
Zhou Bao-zhong said that Chai Shi-rong’s unit in Machang had
become less active than before.
He complained of the results of the Zhanzhonghua incident in
Ningan, which was similar to the Guan’s unit incident14 in
Wangqing, saying that this mishap had prevented his unit from
working overtly. The Zhanzhonghua incident was a deplorable
event which had taken place before Zhou joined with Ping. When
Ping’s unit was suffering internal discord, the rebels offered wine
to Ping and his followers, then disarmed them and fled. Ping had
not even a Mauser. In an effort to re-equip the unit which now had
practically nothing, Ping, together with his faithful subordinates,
disarmed Zhanzhonghua unit in the Nanhutou area, which had
been seeking a way to surrender. After this incident the AJNA
493
units in north Manchuria branded the Ningan guerrilla army which
was associated with the name of Ping Nan-yang as an enemy.
In the final analysis, Zhou’s request was that I should play the
role of an arbitrator in improving his relations with the AJNA units
so that his unit would be able to operate overtly.
Zhou was most seriously worried about the state of the
revolutionary movement in the Ningan area. He was exasperated
by the failure to develop the revolution in this area, as if his own
inability and negligence were responsible for it.
“From the point of view of the east Manchurian people, Ningan
is a place where no revolutionary wind is blowing. I don’t
understand why the masses are in such low spirits. No matter how
earnestly we appeal to the people to rise up for the revolution, they
remain aloof from us. Do you know the attitude of the peasants
here? They say they can make a living even though the landlords
bleed them white. They say, if they go into the mountain they can
obtain a lot of land, and why should they shed blood for the
revolution when they can till the land and earn a living? From the
point of view of the common people, the vast areas of land may
make them happy, but at the moment it dulls their class
consciousness. I don’t know whether we should be proud of the
vast lands of north Manchuria or regret that they exist.”
Listening to him I burst out laughing.
“Ha, ha, it is fortunate for the 400 million Chinese people that
the vast land exists.”
Zhou Bao-zhong, too, laughed merrily, which smoothed the
494
wrinkles from his face.
“Yes, it is. The vast territory and fertile land are a source of
well-being for the whole nation. I was pointlessly worried.
Comrade Kim, I have told you about my problem. Help me,
please. I can only sleep at peace, if I can find a way to develop the
revolution in Ningan, but I don’t know how to do it.”
I could fully sympathize with his problem. He was an able and
well-informed man, but his health was too bad for the arduous
north Manchurian revolution. His festering wound prevented him
from displaying his ability fully. What is worse, he had few
hardcore elements at his disposal.
In the hut in Badaohezi we spent a few days discussing ways of
developing the revolution in north Manchuria. We concluded that
going among the people was the solution to many difficult
problems arising in the north Manchurian revolution. Awakening
the people and mobilizing them was the only way to save the north
Manchurian revolution from stagnation. To this end, we had to
conduct political work among the people and step up the military
operations of the guerrilla army. The armed ranks would be
expanded in the course of fighting, and the revolution would
develop through struggle. If we remained idle and did not fight, we
could do nothing.
Without intensifying our military operations it would be
impossible to improve our relations with the AJNA units and win
them over as allies or to restore Ping Nan-yang’s image, which had
been disgraced by the Zhanzhonghua incident.
495
We confirmed that we shared the same opinions on such
matters.
When we met with Zhou in his hut, Wu Ping, the Comintern’s
special representative to Manchuria, was also there, and he showed
us the six-point anti-Japanese national salvation programme which
he had brought from Shanghai. The original name of this
document was the “Basic Programme of the Chinese People on
Anti-Japanese Operations.” This document was published in the
name of the National Armed Self-defence Preparatory Committee
of China. It was signed by the renowned figures Song Qing-ling,
Zhang Nai-qi, He Xiang-ning and Ma Xiang-bai. Wu Ping said
that the signatories to the document had automatically become
members of this committee and that thousands of people had
already signed it.
The six-point programme of national salvation reflected the
policy of the anti-imperialist united front which the Chinese
Communist Party proposed when the Japanese imperialists were
trying to occupy the north of China proper by posing as the
protector of China, and Jiang Jie-shi was starting the fifth
“punitive” operation against the communist army. In the Chinese
revolution, too, the communists did their best to unite and mobilize
all the national forces. I therefore considered the six-point
programme as a document in season.
For 10 days we discussed these matters comprehensively with
Wu Ping. As I spoke with him I learned that the Chinese
communists had broken the siege of Jiang Jie-shi and started the
496
long march of 25 thousand ri under the banner of the northward
advance against Japan, in accordance with the strategy of Mao Zedong. We were encouraged greatly by the fact that the Chinese
revolution had gone over from retreat, following the failure of the
first civil war, to a partial offensive, consolidating on its success.
The anti-Japanese national salvation movement launched in
China proper, as well as the powerful thrust of the northward
advance against Japan started by the Chinese communists, would
create favourable conditions for the revolutionary struggle of the
Korean and Chinese communists in the east and in other parts of
Manchuria.
Zhou Bao-zhong attached one of his platoons to our unit for
joint operations. The expeditionary force left the camp at
Badaohezi together with this platoon.
A few days later the first shot demonstrating the fraternal
friendship and the proletarian internationalism of the Korean and
Chinese communists rang out in Shitouhe near Lake Jingbo. The
200-strong Japanese “punitive” force which had left Beihutou after
hearing about the appearance of our revolutionary army, became
the target of our machineguns and was mowed down in the middle
of Lake Jingbo.
Following this battle we struck a heavy blow against a Japanese
army unit in the Fangshengou area. The myth of the “invincible
imperial army” which had boasted of winning battle after battle in
the vast area of north Manchuria began to disintegrate. This also
constituted a breakthrough in the Japanese imperialists’ plan for
497
the siege of the guerrilla zones in east Manchuria.
The Ningan people rejoiced over our victory, and spread the
news of the laogaoli army.
Ping Nan-yang, the commander of the Ningan anti-Japanese
guerrilla army, was the first to visit us when he heard the news. As
we were marching toward Xiqinggouzi after a meeting with the
hardcore party members of a district party organization in
Nanhutou, who later helped the Wangqing guerrilla army both
materially and morally, Ping appeared suddenly before me
together with one of Zhou’s orderlies and repeated excitedly,
“Congratulations!” without even introducing himself.
I ordered the marching column to halt and spoke with him
informally.
“Commander Kim Il Sung, the whole of north Manchuria is
buzzing with the news of your victory. My men are delighted at
the news. Let me hold the hand which makes the Japanese
tremble.”
Holding my hand in both of his, he looked me full in the face
with an expression of friendship.
“I have received a report that some of my men in the north of
Dongjingcheng have been attacked by the Jingan army. Whenever
we meet the Japanese or the Jingan army we have a hard time of it.
The thought of it makes my blood boil.”
“Then, shall we try taking a turn with the Jingan army?”
“Commander Kim, if we fight together with you, we will
become bolder and learn from you.”
498
As Ping requested, I accepted his 40 men into our expeditionary
force and sent Zhou’s platoon back to his camp in Badaohezi,
together with the orderly who had guided Ping to me. At the same
time, I sent the soldiers of the Yanji company back to Jiandao, in
view of the tense situation in east Manchuria resulting from the
enemy’s “punitive” operation.
When Ping came to me Zhou sent with him a messenger who
had come from east Manchuria. This messenger told us about the
situation in Jiandao.
As we were marching through Beihutou, I ordered the unit to
leave only one set of footprints in the snow. Because we had to
pass close by one of the enemy’s assembly points, we had to
conceal our tracks. Leaving one set of footprints meant that
everyone in a rank of ten or a hundred men walked by stepping in
the footprints of the man at the head of the column, so that it
looked as if only one man had passed.
As he watched our companies teaching his soldiers how I had
instructed them to march like a single man, to wipe away their
trace, to disperse the unit during the march and to billet soldiers on
a village, Ping commented that the Korean People’s Revolutionary
Army was well-versed in guerrilla warfare.
Together with Ping’s unit we destroyed two battalions of the
Jingan army led by Lieutenant Colonel Takeutsi in the Xinanzhen
area, wiped out another Jingan army unit in a joint operation with
an AJNA unit under the command of Zhongyang on the River
Dahailanghe, and attacked a cavalry company and the 6th infantry
499
company of the Jiangan army in Laozhuanjia, Badaohezi.
As a result of these victorious battles, Chinese anti-Japanese
nationalist army units which had been in difficult circumstances
came one after another to join our expeditionary force.
After meeting briefly again with Zhou in his camp at
Badaohezi, we crossed the River Mudan in late December,
defeated a Jingan army unit and raided a puppet Manchukuo police
station in Xinanzhen at the request of Daping, Sijihao,
Zhanzhonghua, and Renyixia units of the AJNA. We launched
these battles in order once again to enlist in the Ningan guerrilla
army those AJNA units which had left Ping Nan-yang. While
engaging in active operations on our initiative and dealing a
succession of blows to the enemy, the Ningan guerrilla army
continually expanded its ranks by enlisting AJNA units and other
people in local areas who volunteered to join the army.
“Commander Kim, I have nothing to fear now. I am convinced
that we can defeat both the Japanese and the Jingan army. I don’t
know how I can repay my great debt to you,” Ping Nan-yang said
confidently, squeezing my hand, on the day when we fought the
Jingan army in Xinanzhen.
“Don’t mention it. I hope you will destroy as many of the
enemy as possible. An army is toughened through battle, isn’t it?”
I encouraged him enthusiastically, grasping his hands.
During our expedition we also met Chai Shi-rong and Jiang Aimin and discussed the anti-Japanese allied front with them.
Jiang Ai-min, who had been routed by the 13th brigade of the
500
Japanese army, went to east Manchuria to meet me and then came
back after hearing that we were fighting in north Manchuria. He
appeared unbelievably cheerful and high-spirited for a commander
who lost many battles.
“To tell you the truth, I went to Wangqing to request your
assistance. Fang Zhen-sheng said that he was sorry he could not
help me because they were also in difficult circumstances.
Commander Kim, please help me.” Jiang Ai-min spoke frankly
about his problem without concern for his honour as the
commander of a great unit.
Fang was a Chinese who became a regimental commander of
our army after we came to north Manchuria.
We achieved a great deal through joint operations with
Ping’s unit and other large and small AJNA units. The military
and political objectives we had set for the expedition were
being achieved rather smoothly.
When we later returned to Jiandao after completing our
expedition, we heard the glad news that Zhou Bao-zhong had
successfully formed the 5th Army Corps of the Northeast People’s
Revolutionary Army, based on the Ningan anti-Japanese guerrilla
army. Most of the Chinese AJNA units which had developed a
strong militant relationship with us through the fighting in deep
snow in north Manchuria joined the 5th Army Corps.
Many of the cadres of the 5th Army Corps were my intimate
friends in the days of the expedition to north Manchuria. Ping
Nan-yang became the commander of the 1st Regiment of the 1st
501
Division and then was promoted to division commander; Chai Shirong was appointed commander of the 2nd Division before being
promoted to a deputy corps commander. Jiang Ai-min was in
command of the 5th Regiment of the 2nd Division. His unit had
many Korean communists who had shared bloody battles with us.
On hearing the news of the formation of the 5th Army Corps, I
wished Zhou success, picturing in my mind the land of Ningan, far
beyond Laoyeling.
Together with the battle of Luozigou, the first expedition to
north Manchuria marked our first success in frustrating the
enemy’s plan for a siege, and made a significant contribution to
defeating the enemy. Our offensive routed the main force of the
13th brigade of the Japanese army and the Jingan army unit in
Ningan.
We shed much blood in north Manchuria. The political
instructor of the Yanji company and the young orderly Ri Song
Rim fell in battle. This was the bitterest loss to me.
Ri Song Rim was the first orderly whom we had recruited on
our arrival in Wangqing. He had been orphaned by the Japanese
“punitive” operation. We took him and raised him, providing him
with clothes and teaching him to read and write. He had grown
into a quite handsome boy. He would sleep, with his arm round my
neck. Ryang Song Ryong had said that a grown boy should not be
indulged if he was to become a man and that he should be sent to
the Children’s Corps school.
Ri Song Rim cried and said he would not go.
502
Ryang had begun to hate him since Ri began visiting the
Children’s Corps school to show off the small pistol which I had
given him. One day, when we were at a meeting, he had gone to
the school in secret and called out the snotty children who were
playing in the yard to the willowy dike to show off his pistol.
Before he had disassembled the pistol and reassembled it, the
break was over. When the teacher came into the classroom to
begin the new lesson, he was surprised, and called out the
children’s name. None of the children who had gone out to see
Ri’s pistol had come back.
Ryang heard this story and suggested to me I should replace the
orderly with another man because he might cause an accident.
But I did not accept his suggestion.
Ri Song Rim had been to Onsong and Jongsong with me, and
stayed for a long time on the mountain at the back of Tumen. He
was a plucky and courageous orderly who was not afraid of death.
I remember he was killed in battle near Tuanshanzi. We were
fiercely attacked from two sides by the Japanese army and the
Jiangan army. As he was running to convey my orders to Ping’s
unit, he was surprised by the enemy. I saw his Mauser after he
died. The magazine was empty and there were several dead bodies
of the enemy scattered around him. He made the enemy pay dearly
for the blood he shed. We cried so sadly that Ping Nan-yang also
cried loudly.
When I found Ri’s dead body on the field of our victory the first
thing I saw in my mind’s eye was the Children’s Corps school in
503
Wangqing which he had visited as if it were his own home. In this
school he was one of many childhood friends who were
inseparable from each other.
How could I meet the Children’s Corps members of Wangqing
after burying Song Rim in north Manchuria? I choked on my tears,
and there was a lump in my throat.
When my comrades-in-arms suggested we break the frozen
ground and bury him, I dissuaded them from covering his body
with frozen earth because I felt as if he would come to life again
and snuggle into my bosom. I could not turn on my heel knowing I
had to leave my child orderly in this terribly frozen land.
Ri Song Rim, who complained of the steepness of the mountain
as we crossed the Laoyeling Mountains, is now lying quietly in
that valley with his comrades-in-arms, listening to the song of new
life ringing across the vastness of Manchuria.
504
4. The Sound of the Mouthorgan
Ringing across Ningan
Nothing makes an army suffer more misery than being given
the cold shoulder by the people for whom it is fighting. The reader
may find it hard to believe that we were given the cold shoulder
from the time we began crossing the Laoyeling Mountains. And he
might ask, “Have the people, the creator, defender and carrier of
morals, ever turned away their faces from the revolutionary army
or treated coldly the army which defends their interests?”
I am obliged to contradict common sense and say that I have
had such an experience.
Everyone knew that Ningan, with its fertile land, was a great
granary. But, when we came down from the Laoyeling Mountains
and entered north Manchuria, the people in Ningan hated even to
prepare meals for us. If they had treated us inhospitably because
they were in dire poverty, we would have felt pity for them. But
they turned their backs on us because of misunderstanding and
distrust, and this dumbfounded us, for we were accustomed to
support and hospitality from the people. If our expeditionary
505
soldiers in their snow shoes and puttees appeared in the distance,
they would call their women into the houses and shut their doors,
shouting, “The ‘Koryo red army’ is coming!” And then they
watched our every move cautiously. Such unpleasant experiences
hurt our pride.
We had to prepare our meals and sleep in the open for a good
while. Life had never been like this in Jiandao. Whenever we
returned home in triumph, the people in east Manchuria would run
to welcome us in groups, beating drums and gongs, clapping their
hands and presenting bouquets to us. Some people would offer us
hot water or boiled green maize. One day a pine arch was even
erected in Macun to congratulate the soldiers.
But the Ningan people gave us a wide berth. We sent out scouts
and set the underground organizations in action, but we failed to
catch the voice of the people in this region. This was a much
cooler welcome than we had expected in east Manchuria on the
basis of information from Zhou Bao-zhong and Ko Pobae, who
had often visited north Manchuria.
There was a village called Wolianghe in Ningan County. It was
called Wolianghe because it had fertile land and plenty of food
grain, but the people there ignored us completely, and did not even
think of providing food.
We tried to gather them together to initiate political work, but
they did not respond to our request. We could not even give them a
lecture on current events. Ri Song Rim may have complained of
the steep Laoye- ling Mountains, but this barrier was rougher and
506
steeper.
Some of my men said that Ninganites were cold-blooded people
by nature, but I rejected this. The mind of the people may vary a
little, but it was hardly possible that the people in this place were
the only ones to lack the good manners and customs of Chinese or
Koreans, who accord hospitality to their guests and take good care
of them.
What, then, was the reason for this unfriendly attitude of the
Ningan people, which stunned the men of our expeditionary force?
According to the historical record, in olden times Ningan was
the capital of Palhae. This time-honoured city once had a
population of 100,000.
This indicated that this place had a long history of development.
The historical record also indicated that the land of this place was
fertile and its people were industrious, frugal, simple-hearted, and
trustworthy and respected justice and law.
After the capital of Palhae was moved to another place and its
people were scattered in all directions, its population increased or
decreased over the millennia and scores of generations, but the
courtesy and civilized customs of the Ninganites were neither
debased nor dishonoured, but handed down without change.
It was unreasonable to believe that the Ningan people were
cold-hearted by nature.
Some soldiers alleged that Ningan was not a suitable place for
the communist movement. They said that, firstly, the level of
consciousness of these people was too low to assimilate the
507
communist idea, and secondly, that Ningan County had abundant
land, whereas the number of farmers who cultivated it was
comparably small, so there would not be any antagonism in social
and class relations and, accordingly, a class struggle would not
take place.
Such nihilistic assertions were refuted mercilessly. Is any
particular place suitable for communism while any other place is
not suitable for communism? Communists who say so cannot win
the world. With this kind of communism we cannot realize the
slogan “Workers of the Whole World, Unite!” which is written in
The Communist Manifesto. The argument that there would be no
antagonism in people’s relations in a place where the population
was thin and land was plentiful was a superficial view which
resulted from an ignorance of reality. According to such an
argument, the class contradictions should have been acuter in
densely populated Germany than in sparsely populated Russia and
accordingly, the revolution should have achieved victory in
Germany earlier than in Russia. I rejected such arguments as
unfounded.
I said the fact that the Ningan people did not understand
communism and were hostile to the communists should be
explained by the crimes of the Japanese imperialists, who resorted
to every conceivable means to destroy communism. When the
communist movement became active in Ningan, the Japanese
imperialists immediately launched a pernicious anti-communist
propaganda campaign to drive a wedge between the communists
508
and the people. In Ningan, where the people were relatively
backward in their political and ideological enlightenment, the
enemy’s propaganda penetrated easily into the people’s minds.
The early Korean communists who had spent their energies in
factional strife were also to blame for the anti-communist tendency
prevailing in the Ningan area. Already in the mid-1920s,
immediately after a communist party was founded in Korea, the
Tuesday group established its organization under the magnificent
name of the Manchurian general bureau of the Korean Communist
Party, and set about expanding the power of its own group,
effectively selling out the noble name of communism. They
provoked the simple and good-natured people to engage in
reckless demonstrations and riots by clamouring for the
independence of Korea and the immediate building of socialism.
The ultra-Leftists broadcast an appeal to the Ningan people to
rise up in the May 30 Uprising. The main targets of this uprising in
Jiandao were the Japanese government organs for colonial rule and
the Chinese landlords, but in Ningan the target was the nationalist
organizations, such as the Korean General Association. The
demonstration, which started in the county town, suffered a heavy
blow at the very outset.
The May Day demonstration in 1932, too, ended by drowning
the Ningan county town in a bloodbath and exposing the core
elements to repression by the enemy. As a result of these
adventuristic demonstrations, the revolutionary organizations in
Ningan were destroyed as groups. After the May Day
509
demonstration the communist movement in Ningan went into a
rapid decline. The party leadership stopped developing the armed
forces and guerrilla zones and dispersed to Muling, Dongning,
Wangqing and other places. Some people gave up the revolution
and went back to the Ningan county town.
The indiscriminate white terrorism of the Japanese imperialists
and the Manchukuo army and police besmirched the image of
communism in the eyes of the people.
The fear of prison and death which they faced at the end of their
struggle made them tremble in despair. The nihilistic view was
prevalent among many people that the result of revolution was
death, and it would be pointless to take part in the communist
movement.
The Chinese communists came and tried to rebuild the
revolution in Ningan, after the Korean communists had left
declaring the attempt was futile and the revolution would not take
root in the minds of the masses, but they also were dumbfounded
at the cold attitude of the masses towards the revolution in general.
Some Korean nationalists were also to blame for spreading anticommunist poison in Ningan. The remnants of the Independence
Army which fled to Russia in fright at the large-scale “punitive”
operations in the year of Kyongsin (1920), and then returned to
Ningan following the Heihe incident15 were fanatical in their antiSoviet, anti-communist propaganda. They slandered communism
and the Soviet Union, saying that the dreadful incident in Heihe
had been provoked by the Korean communists in exile in
510
conspiracy with the Soviet Union. The nationalists even went so
far as to say that Kim Jwa Jin was killed because of the
communists. Of course, this was a lie. But the innocent people
believed it.
The people in Ningan were wary not just of communism but of
any army. They hated all armies, regardless of their identity and
their mission, because they considered every army they had seen to
be hangers-on who emptied their granaries and took their money.
To say nothing of the Japanese army and the puppet Manchukuo
army, some Chinese
nationalist army units who professed the anti-Japanese national
salvation struggle, also took the people’s money, grains and
domestic animals. The Korean nationalists set up the Sinmin-bu,
an administrative organization, in Ningan, and exacted war funds
and military provisions from the people. What is worse, the local
bandits who frequently took people hostage, could fall upon them
at any time and aggravate their mood. So the feelings of the
people, who had to submit to all of these factions, were beyond
description. Taking this historical background into consideration, it
would have been unreasonable to blame them for their coldheartedness. It is not really of much significance that the
expeditionary force did not receive supplies from the people. The
greatest problem was that one of the major aims of our expedition,
the aim of sowing the seeds of revolution among the people of
north Manchuria, was not being achieved. If the people would
never open their hearts to us, we would never find a way to
511
revolutionize north Manchuria.
In order to summon the Ningan people to rise in revolution we
had to make a breakthrough somehow.
While taking stock of the party work in the Badaohezi district,
we developed a deeper grasp of the reality of Ningan County with
the help of Kim Paek Ryong, secretary of the district party
committee. According to him, Badaohezi had been more
effectively revolutionized than any other part of Ningan County.
Badaohezi was also known as Xiaolaidipan, the place where the
Ningan county party committee and the Badaohezi district party
committee were located. The word Xiaolaidipan was derived from
the name of Kim So Rae (Xiaolai is the Chinese pronunciation of
So Rae), who was the leader of the Taejong religion in and around
Helong County.
I first heard about Kim So Rae from So Jung Sok when I
attended the Jilin Yuwen Middle School. So Jung Sok once taught
at the Konwon School in Helong, which was established by Kim
So Rae. Kim So Rae was the founder and headmaster of this
school and had close relations with So Il as well as the important
figures of the northern military and political administration and the
Jiandao National Association. As a man of a strong anti-Japanese
sentiment, he supported the national salvation movement by
sending his school graduates to the Independence Army units led
by such renowned generals as Hong Pom Do and Kim Jwa Jin.
After the Independence Army withdrew from north Jiandao,
Kim So Rae bought land in the Badaohezi valley and became a
512
landlord there, supplying war funds to Kim Jwa Jin’s
Independence Army unit. Ri Kwang also obtained many rifles
from him immediately after the guerrilla army was founded.
The revolutionaries in the Ningan area disliked him because he
was the leader of the Taejong religion. Some of those who were
ignorant of history mistook this movement for a Japanese religion.
The Taejong religion was a pure Korean religion, which
worshipped Hwanin, Hwanung and Hwangom, the Gods who are
described in the Korea-founding myth.
Kim Paek Ryong said that the Badaohezi valley was 20 to 25
miles long. There were many villages scattered in the valley and
Koreans made up a considerable proportion of the inhabitants.
Badaohezi, which had once been a thriving supply base for the
Independence Army, became a base for the activity of the Ningan
guerrilla army at the beginning of the 1930s.
Without any great hope, I employed the good offices of Kim
Paek Ryong to send a political work team to a village in Badaohezi
to inquire into the mood of the population and also to reconnoitre
the enemy’s movements. The team was made up of masters of
propaganda and agitation.
However, Wang Tae Hung, the political instructor of the 5th
company, who led the team to the village, came back to me
looking exhausted.
“We failed again. Any amusing story fell flat with them. I
would rather preach the Four Books and Three Classics to the ear
of an ox than talk to the Ningan people.”
513
He dropped his head in despair after making his report.
Listening to his words, Kim Paek Ryong heaved a sigh, as if it
were his mistake that the Ninganites were treating the guests from
east Manchuria so coldly.
“Anyhow, the Ningan people are a real problem. We have made
great efforts to persuade them, even sending an inspection group to
east Manchuria to learn from their experience, but they are so
stubborn. After the inspection group returned they established a
Children’ Corps school which enrolled about 50 pupils at first, but
it all came to nothing.”
What should we make of people who turned their backs on
revolutionaries who defended and represented their interests? I
pondered deeply on this question because I was facing such a sheer
barrier for the first time in my life. Our efforts to revolutionize
Fuerhe and Wujiazi had not gone entirely smoothly, but the people
there were not so cold-hearted as in Ningan.
In the thousands of years of Korean history the masses of the
people had never been bad. In my life I had never had to
distinguish between good and bad masses of the people. Those
who besmirched history and sought to deceive it were a handful of
people, the ruling circles. Of course, there were individual traitors
to the nation, misers, swindlers, imposters, ambitious men and
immoral men. But they were only a few unhulled grains among the
cleaned rice. The great mass of the people, which we can regard as
representing the whole of this world, has always driven the wheel
of history forward honestly and sincerely. They produced turtle
514
boats16 and built pyramids if necessary. When the times required
their blood they dashed towards the enemy’s pillbox, braving
death without hesitation.
The problem was that we had failed to find a way to touch the
hearts of the Ningan people.
The political work team led by Wang Tae Hung had clearly
conducted a stirring anti-Japanese propaganda campaign. Did the
Ningan people need more of such speeches? They must have heard
enough of them until to burn their ears. The Independence Army,
the national salvation army, and even the bandits used to make
such speeches. Could Wang’s political work succeed on the basis
of speeches?
Their mistake was that they tried blindly to teach the people. Since
when did we regard ourselves as the people’s teachers and the people
as our pupils? No doubt it was the communists’ mission to lead the
people from darkness to light, but wasn’t it impudent of us to pose as
their teachers?
There might be many ways for us to penetrate the depths of
people’s hearts, but their hearts would accept only sincerity. Only
sincerity could fuse our blood and their blood as in one artery.
Unless we mixed with the people as their own sons, grandsons and
brothers, we would be forsaken for ever by the people of Ningan.
I was told that when the Wangqing children’s art troupe played
in Ningan, the performance hall was crowded out every time. Both
the children’s art troupe and the guerrillas appealed to them in the
name of the revolution, but the people had welcomed the former
515
and turned their backs on the latter.
“Did you see the performance of our children’s art troupe when
they came here?” I asked Kim Paek Ryong.
“Yes, I did, their performance was excellent.” He said the art
troupe had set Ningan buzzing with excitement.
“Wherever the children’s art troupe went there were crowds of
people, I was told. A wonderful change to take place among the
Ningan people, who did not like communist propaganda, wasn’t it?
What do you think attracted so many people?”
“The children behaved quite charmingly. They fascinated the
Ningan people by their performances and influenced them by
always laughing as brightly as the full moon in the clear sky. They
behaved with people like their own fathers and mothers, so the
Ninganites, no matter how callous, could not but be moved.”
“Their talent made them very popular in Wangqing, too.”
“Of course, their performance was a success, but it was the
children themselves who won the people’s hearts. I myself was
charmed by their good behaviour. They cleaned up all of
Badaohezi village. They used to get up early to make the village
spick and span. In daytime they helped the peasants in the field.”
Kim Paek Ryong praised the children’s art troupe members
repeatedly, making me feel proud of them.
“They have become sensible at an early age.”
“The children endeared themselves to the villagers. When they
saw the villagers, even in the distance, they raised their hands in
salute. They followed the grown-ups, addressing them as
516
‘grandfather,’ ‘father,’ ‘aunt,’ ‘sister.’ They were loved by the
whole village.”
The children’s art troupe won the people’s hearts because they
gave their own hearts to the people. When we dropped an axe into
an ice hole in the Tuman River, we spent half a day in sincere
efforts to find it. Why? Because we were devoted to the people and
loved them. When we showed them our sincerity, they never
rejected it.
Wang’s political work team made a mistake, because they
failed to give their hearts sincerely to the people. They clung to
their method only with the intention of revolutionizing the people
of north Manchuria, but they never thought of loving them and
becoming intimate with them. It was not strange that the people in
north Manchuria had not opened their hearts to us.
First of all, it was a mistake to have started their contact with
the people with a speech. How valuable the lesson we learned
from the activities of the Wangqing children’s art troupe, which
first gave the people their own hearts and then tugged at their
heartstrings with songs!
I made up my mind to change the form of our political work
and discussed the matter with our commanding officers. I then
instructed the company political instructors to bring all our good
mouthorgan players to the headquarters. When they had gathered I
checked them one by one.
Hong Pom from the Yanji company played the mouthorgan
well enough to perk up an audience. He sometimes produced the
517
sound of an accordion concert on his harmonica. A soldier of the
Wangqing 5th company was famous for mouthorgan playing, but
he was a novice compared with Hong.
Hong Pom had practised the mouthorgan from his primary
school days. A visitor to his house once left a mouthorgan in his
room and did not come again, so it naturally became Hong’s
favourite. Practising on this instrument for several years he
developed his talent admirably, but the mouthorgan became worn
out and its gilt came off. Fortunately its sound remained
unchanged.
I saw his mouthorgan as we were preparing for the expedition
in Duitoulazi and thought I should obtain a new one for him. But I
had no chance to do this before we had to leave for north
Manchuria.
Many of the guerrillas and other people in Jiandao knew of
Hong Pom’s career. He was an ordinary soldier, but he became a
topic of interested discussion among the people because of his
extraordinary talent in playing the mouthorgan. Mouthorgan
players were always loved by their comrades-in-arms.
Hong’s native town was Jongsong, North Hamgyong Province.
He followed his parents to Jiandao and took part in the
revolutionary movement from his young days. Once as a Red
Guards man he joined in the mass struggle to frustrate the DunhuaTumen railway project. After the dissolution of the Hailangou
guerrilla zone, he moved to Wangougou, carrying his knapsack
with a mouthorgan in it, and joined the guerrilla army.
518
I instructed Wang Tae Hung to take the mouthorgan concert
group to the village where he had failed once and to try to move
their hearts. And I requested Kim Paek Ryong to buy as many
mouthorgans as possible, with the help of the underground
organizations.
That day I visited the secretariat of the Ningan county party
committee to prepare the propaganda materials for the people.
While I was talking to the comrades at the secretariat, Wang, who
had been to the village with the mouthorgan concert group,
appeared before me with a broad smile on his face.
“Comrade Commander, it was a success. Those uncouth
persons opened their hearts to us at last.”
Wang was a commanding officer of a particular character, who
first reported the result, and then explained what he had done. The
activity of the mouthorgan concert group was extremely
instructive. It won the hearts of the callous people who had turned
their backs on the revolutionary army.
The group started by clearing the snow from the front yard of a
house in the centre of the village. After posting a sentry on this
fairly large area of ground, Hong Pom and another man played a
mouthorgan duet as the first item on the programme. The rest of
the group danced to the tune of mouthorgans. Two or three boys
who were spinning tops in a nearby lane ran towards the fence of
the yard to watch the performance. Other children also came
running towards the show from other lanes, hitching up the
waistbands of their trousers as they came.
519
The mouthorgan duet began with The Song of General
Mobilization, then changed into The Children’s Song and How
Far Have We Come? The children, charmed by the beautiful
melody of Hong’s mouthorgan, followed the song and clapped
their hands. Some children ran about the village shouting that the
“Koryo red army” soldiers from Jiandao were dancing. When the
grown-ups heard the news, they watched the revolutionary army’s
entertainments from a distance with folded arms. Then some of
them approached the performance and gazed at the “musicians” of
the “Koryo red army.”
When 40 to 50 people had gathered to see the performance, the
mouthorgan concert group played Arirang. This attracted the
whole village, and the audience rapidly increased to one hundred,
two hundred and at last three hundred.
At this moment Ko Pobae appeared and sang the Melancholy
Song of Phyongan Province. The hundreds of villagers were
captivated by his sorrowful melody and encircled the yard in a
tight ring, straining their ears to catch the sounds issuing from the
mouth of this soldier of the “Koryo red army.”
Ko stopped singing halfway and began delivering a speech in a
new dramatic tone.
“Dear villagers, where’s your home town? North Kyongsang
Province! Kangwon Province! South Hamgyong Province! South
Phyongan Province! Don’t ask me where I come from. Don’t think
I’m putting on airs. I don’t know where I was born. I know only
that I was born in a coastal village in Korea. I arrived in Jiandao,
520
crossing the river on my parent’s back. I don’t know whether it
was the Tuman River or the Amnok River. I am such a dunce.”
The audience was amused by his oratorical talent, laughing and
whispering in response.
In an amusing manner, like an old story-teller, he told how he
wandered about Jiandao like a dried leaf and how he finished off
Japs in many battles after he became a guerrilla soldier. Then, as if
he had simply turned over a gramophone record, he changed his
subject quite naturally into a speech intended to awaken the people
to the need for the revolution.
“Dear villagers, what is our unanimous desire? We wish we
could return home. But the Japs stand on the road to our
homeland. Should we leave those barbarians alone? No, I can’t. So
I joined the guerrilla army with a rifle in my hand. We came to
Ningan to destroy the Japanese. I was told that the Japanese
soldiers in north Manchuria are more arrogant.”
When his speech reached this point, a Japanese army cap
appeared from nowhere on his head. He had hidden it in the
waistband of his trousers and transferred it in a flash to his head.
Then a moustache and spectacles appeared on his face. The
audience immediately grasped that he was made up as a Japanese
army officer.
In this comic make-up Ko Pobae stretched himself in a yawn
and walked round the yard two or three times with his hands
folded behind his back, stretching his jaw and twitching his face in
a funny fashion. The people were reminded of a Japanese army
521
officer taking a walk in the ground of his barracks immediately
after rising from his bed.
The audience tittered at first and then split their sides in
laughter.
As soon as laughter calmed down, Ko went round the audience
one by one, laughing in different kinds according to their sex and
age—an old woman’s voice before a grandmother, an old man’s
voice before a grandfather and a bride’s voice before a young lady.
They laughed themselves into convulsions, until the tears came
running down.
After winning over the villagers in this way, the mouthorgan
concert group launched into anti-Japanese propaganda and
appealed to the people to support the revolutionary army. The
mouthorgan concert group was able to have such remarkable
success in the very place where the political work team failed the
previous day, because their propaganda catered honestly to the
feelings of the villagers.
Drawing on this experience, we began to mix more closely with
the people and revolutionized tens of villages in Ningan one after
another by various methods. The iron barrier which had separated
the Ningan people from the “Koryo red army” from east
Manchuria was removed at last. Where the “Koryo red army” had
once passed by, the ranks of the Communist Party increased in
numbers, and the Young Communist League, the Women’s
Association, the Children’s Corps and other revolutionary
organizations expanded rapidly.
522
The people who opened their hearts wide to the communists
experienced the greatest pride of their life in supporting and
assisting the revolutionary army.
Among such people I still recall many unforgettable men and
women such as old man Kim in the Tianqiaoling timber mill, old
man Jo Thaek Ju in Dawaizi, the old Chinese woman Meng
Cheng-fu in Wolianghe and old man Ri in Nanhutou.
Old woman Meng frequently gave the expeditionary force
valuable information about the enemy’s movements, though she
once suffered all sorts of hardships when she was arrested by the
Japanese police together with the wife of her husband’s cousin.
Old man Ri in Nanhutou was under constant surveillance by the
enemy. The enemy set fire to his eight-kan house (a kan is
equivalent to 36 square feet—Tr.) because he supported the
guerrilla army. Once he was arrested by the military police and
severely flogged. Despite these bitter experiences, he frequently
visited our revolutionary army’s camp, bringing with him food and
footwear for the soldiers.
“Are you not afraid of the enemy, grandfather?” I once asked
him.
“Yes, I am afraid,” the old man replied. “If the enemy knew that
I sent supplies to the revolutionary army, my whole family,
including my three sons, would be killed. But we have no other
choice. We cannot remain indifferent and consider only our own
safety, while you revolutionary army soldiers are enduring every
possible hardship in order to liberate the country, with no place to
523
sleep comfortably and no decent meals.”
The people in north Manchuria cherished ardent love for their
country and for justice.
Their love for the country was no less warm than that of the east
Manchurian people. The only difference was that their love had
been hemmed in by a much thicker and higher fence.
The people open their hearts without hesitation to those who
sympathize with them and understand them, and embrace them
with burning enthusiasm. But they slam the door against those
ingrates who have never thought about the fact that the soil in
which they grew up was the people, those impertinent fellows who
consider that the people are duty-bound to serve them, and they
have the right to be served, those bureaucrats who think they can
rule over the people as they like, those exploiters who regard the
people as a cow which produces milk any time they want, those
windbags who shut their eyes and remain indifferent when the
people are suffering agony, though they always say that they love
the people, all of these hypocrites, loafers and swindlers.
None of my comrades-in-arms now alive can recall the first
north Manchurian expedition. Only a few out of those 170 men
returned to the liberated homeland. I think O Jun Ok and Yon Hui
Su were among the Wangqing company soldiers who returned.
When we were operating in Ningan, Kang Kon was a
Children’s Corps member. Judging from his age alone, he could
well have lived till now and taken part in the revolution. But he
fell in action on the front line in early autumn of the year when the
524
great Fatherland Liberation War broke out. At that time he was the
Chief of the General Staff of the Korean People’s Army.
Ko Pobae later served as a regiment political commissar in the
5th Army Corps under Zhou Bao-zhong’s command.
Some people say he fell in action and others say that he went to
the Soviet Union and died there, but I do not know which is the
truth. When I received the news of the death of such a talented
optimist, who always set the whole of Jiandao laughing with his
ceaseless jokes and wisecracks, I could not believe it. It seemed
inconceivable to me that such an optimist could have died.
The majority of the mouthorgan concert group who opened the
path to north Manchuria with Ko Pobae remained in north
Manchuria at Zhou Bao-zhong’s request or died in fierce battles on
the way back to east Manchuria. I heard nothing about the rest of
them afterwards.
I cannot find any way to clarify what happened to them. Even
their names have grown dim in my memory.
One day half a century after the first north Manchurian
expedition, I received the happy news that one of the participants
in the expedition was living in Pyongyang. When I looked at the
picture which the officials involved sent to me, I saw that it was
Hong Pom, the leader of the mouthorgan concert group.
The severe snowstorm by which we were threatened in north
Manchuria, and the unprecedentedly arduous march we had made
through the snowstorm had left their clear imprints around his
eyes. His face was changed beyond recognition by the ceaseless
525
toil of the years of a long life, but to my joy, his unusually long
neck, like a stork’s, still reminded me of how he looked in his
younger days.
Was this really the famous mouthorgan player Hong Pom who
basked in the love of all the people of Jiandao? Why had this
treasure, a participant and witness of the first expedition to north
Manchuria, only now announced his presence after living near me
all this time?
I told the officials to ask him why.
He had not called on me because he was too simple, and too
modest.
“I took part in the anti-Japanese revolution, but I rendered no
distinguished service. If I have ever done anything I can feel proud
of, it is that I took part in the first expedition to north Manchuria
under the command of our leader. After returning from north
Manchuria I caught a fever in the backwoods of Sandaowan, and
suffering from it for a long time, I was unaware even of the
dissolution of guerrilla zones. Having lost all contact with the unit,
I returned home. If I had said that I was an anti-Japanese war
veteran, the Party would have cared for me like a precious
treasure. But I did not wish to be a burden to the Party.” These
were the words of Hong Pom, an anti-Japanese war veteran.
At the age of 70 he was working as a guard at the Jonsung
security substation. He was living in a single-room house. While
the musicians of the new generation who were born in the 1950s or
1960s were moving into new three-room or four-room houses, this
526
mouthorgan player of the guerrilla army, who went through all the
hardships of the long-drawn-out war against the Japanese,
contented himself with a single-room house. He did not desire any
special treatment or any privileges.
All our anti-Japanese war veterans are such people.
Hong Pom is said to have kept all his life the mouthorgan which
I bought for him in Ningan. When our historians called on him to
collect historical materials, Hong Pom used this mouthorgan to
play the revolutionary songs which we had sung during the north
Manchurian expedition. They said that Hong was an excellent
player.
He died after moving to a new flat in Kwangbok Street
provided by the Party.
Our veterans, who had endured severe trials such as the north
Manchurian expedition and the arduous march, continued to
overcome all manner of hardships together with us even after
returning to the liberated homeland.
What a profound and appealing truth is contained in the old
saying that the hardships one experiences in one’s younger days
are worth more than one’s weight in gold! Hardships and trials are
the mother of all blessings.
527
5. The Snowstorm in the Tianqiaoling
Mountains
Late in January 1935, our expeditionary force set out on its
return journey after carrying out its military and political tasks.
When it left Duitoulazi, Wangqing, the unit had been 170
strong, but now there were only 50 to 60 men left. After the Yanji
company left for east Manchuria at the beginning of the campaign,
the Hunchun company, too, had withdrawn from Ningan. Their
withdrawal had been necessary because of the pressing need to
defend the strategic centre of the revolution against the enemy’s
schemes of siege. We had suffered many casualties in a succession
of battles lasting three months. By the time the wounded soldiers
had been evacuated to safe places, only one third of our force
remained.
There was no source of reinforcements. When the expeditionary
force stayed in the villages, many young people volunteered to join
us, but we sent them to Zhou Bao-zhong’s unit.
Zhou Bao-zhong was deeply concerned about our return
journey.
528
“Available intelligence says that the enemy is tracking you
frantically, Comrade Kim Il Sung. Apparently they wish to make
you pay dearly. What hard blows they have suffered from you this
winter! Frankly, I am concerned for your safety.” He looked at me
anxiously.
“Thank you. The snowstorm in Laoyeling may cover our tracks
again. Don’t worry too much. In any case, we shall return safely,”
I said with a light heart, feeling grateful to him for being so
considerate.
“Commander Kim, you are about to go through the jaws of
death, but you are as carefree, and optimistic as ever.”
Zhou Bao-zhong advised us to take the safest and the most
reliable route for our return march. In addition, he reinforced us
with a detachment of 100 men from the Chinese anti-Japanese
nationalist army. The route he had shown us was a roundabout
way along the Tianqiaoling and Laoyeling Mountains and
Barengou. It was not like the well-beaten path we had taken on our
campaign to north Manchuria by way of Duitoulazi, Laoyeling and
Badaohezi. The new route was a trail along mountain ridges which
lay far away from enemy camps. Zhou said that the enemy could
not even imagine that we would take this route.
Ping Nan-yang knew this route better than Zhou Bao-zhong. He
stroked my arm as he said:
“If you slip away by the trail through Tianqiaoling Mountains
everything may go well. There are timber mills there which have
plenty of food. The ‘punitive’ troops seldom come near
529
Tianqiaoling, I assure you.”
Tianqiaoling literally means a bridge under the sky. It is a steep
mountain range which looks like a dangerous bridge.
Following the advice of our comrades in north Manchuria, we
decided to take the roundabout route of Tianqiaoling-LaoyelingBarengou to Jiandao. Two or three other mountain passes in
Laoyeling had already been blocked by the enemy.
Our comrades-in-arms in north Manchuria gave us a hearty
send-off as we left Zhou’s mountain lodge.
Our hearts bled as we left for Jiandao, without even burying Ri
Song Rim and many other fallen comrades, leaving them lying on
the frozen ground without a pillow for their heads, without a
tombstone to mark their resting-place.
Farewell, comrades-in-arms! When the country has won
independence we will come again to see you. We are now
returning, leaving you behind on the frozen ground in a far-off
foreign land, but when liberation has come, we will carry you on
our backs to the hills at the back of your home villages, we will set
up tombstones over your graves, build stone offertory tables, plant
flowers around them and hold memorial services for you every
year. Good-bye, comrades.
With this thought I ordered the whole unit to take off their caps
and pay three minutes’ silent tribute to our comrades-in-arms who
had fallen in the wilderness of north Manchuria.
That day heavy snow fell all day long, piling up ankle-deep, as
if to console and cover our fallen comrades lying in their summer
530
clothes on the unknown hills and valleys of Ningan. The snow
covered our footprints, assisting up hiding our tracks.
Even the heavy snowfall, however, could not completely
conceal our march from the enemy’s fieldglasses. While we were
taking a short break on a 700-metre-high mountain ridge after
eating the lunch we had received from the north Manchurian
comrades on our departure, Japanese “punitive” troops appeared in
the far distance.
It was a surprise to see the enemy in pursuit of us in this
primeval forest, despite all the assurance Ping Nan-yang had given
upon his oath of honour.
The men became wide-awake, and began wondering whether
they had come the wrong way. Some of them even complained
that now they would be unable to relax as they had wished to do
on their way back. I thought that in this mental state it would be
impossible for them to fight their way back successfully.
I felt they needed bucking up.
“Comrades, we have been living in enemy encirclement for
years. We have been surrounded on all sides, even from the sky.
Wherever we guerrillas were, the enemy was always all around us.
When have any of you ever marched without an enemy in pursuit?
How many marches have you made without hearing a gunshot or
without fighting hand to hand, in the history of this war against the
Japanese? We must be ready to fight on this march, too. Fighting
is the only way to break through the enemy and reach Jiandao.”
All the men bucked up at my words.
531
We sent out a reconnaissance party, which raided the enemy
and took two scouts prisoner. Under their interrogation the
prisoners now and then mentioned the name of the commander of
a unit of the Jingan army, Yoshizaki, who had suffered many
defeats in previous battles with us. In order to redeem his
ignominious defeats Yoshizaki was pursuing us with a reinforced
unit. These were the “punitive” troops who were chasing us.
The Jingan guerrilla army, which had been organized
immediately after September 18 incident, as a special detachment
to help the Kwantung Army under the direction of its staff officer,
Major Komatsu, was the predecessor of the Jingan army, which
consisted of both Japanese and Manchurians. In November 1932,
the Jingan army was placed under the command of the puppet
Manchukuo army, which was founded at that time, but two thirds
of its officers, including its commander Major General Fujii Juro,
were Japanese. The Jingan army had a cadet corps, most of which
were 17 or 18 year-old secondary school leavers from Japan. The
weapons and clothing for the Jingan army were supplied by the
Kwantung Army. The Jingan army was known as the “red
armband army” because its soldiers wore red armbands. They had
been trained in the spirit of “always fighting in the battlefield” and
imbued with “Seian-Tamashii” (Jingan spirit) as well as “YamatoTamashii” (Japanese spirit).
Most of the Chinese in this army were the children of the
propertied class and spoke Japanese fluently.
The aim of this army of faithful dogs of the Japanese
532
imperialists was to counter the guerrilla warfare of the communists
with its own guerrilla warfare. In fact, therefore, the main
objective of this army was to annihilate our guerrilla army.
At the outset, the Jingan guerrilla army was a force of 3,000,
which was a little more than one regiment of the Japanese army.
Yoshizaki was the commander of the 1st infantry regiment of this
army. Yoshizaki unit was the most tenacious and the most bestial
of the Jingan army. Even the strongest of armies had to anticipate a
bloody battle if they were engaged by this “punitive” force.
Yoshizaki always had sufficient reserves for the immediate
replacement of his casualties, he was ready for a prolonged
engagement with the expeditionary force of the people’s
revolutionary army. But we had no reserves to replace our loss.
We had to exchange fire with the pursuing enemy four or five
times every day. When we marched the enemy marched, and when
we camped the enemy camped. They stuck to us like leeches until
our tongues were lolling out of our heads from the chase.
As Zhou Bao-zhong had said, the Jingan army knew that I,
Kim Il Sung, was in command of the unit, how strong we were and
what tactics we were using. They also knew that there was no
communist force in Tianqiaoling and its vicinity which could help
us. In those days, the Japanese army had an efficient intelligence
service. We were fighting an enemy who knew everything about
us.
The enemy continually brought up fresh replacements,
clamouring that to kill one communist at the cost of a hundred men
533
was a success because he could replace that many whereas we
could not. The real intent of the Jingan army was to exterminate
our expeditionary force from Jiandao even at the cost of 1,000
men. The enemy believed that if the expeditionary force was
annihilated, that would be the end of Kim Il Sung, and that without
Kim Il Sung the Korean communist army and its resistance to
Manchukuo and Japan would collapse.
The Jingan army was a genuinely dogged and brutal army.
Worse still, the snowstorms that year were so violent that we could
hardly distinguish between friend and foe. Only by issuing a
challenge could we tell the enemy from our own men and start a
battle.
The soldiers of the Chinese anti-Japanese nationalist army who
had been in our company left us, unable to endure this severe trial.
This tenacious and brutal enemy, pursuing them closely in the
biting cold was a challenge beyond the imagination of the Chinese
nationalist soldiers, who lacked the spirit of self-sacrifice. They
did not protect us, but we protected them to the very last.
The food which Ping Nan-yang had prepared for our march
soon ran out. For several days we had been trying to allay our
hunger by licking snow balls. In the totally uninhabited wilderness
of the forests, snow was the only thing we could get. We organized
death-defying squads and raided the enemy camp several times,
but the booty was not enough to feed the whole unit. When they
were in the battlefield, the enemy did not carry much food with
them either.
534
No matter how difficult the situation was, we had to get as far
as the Tianqiaoling timber mill, for Ping Nan-yang had said there
was plenty of food there.
With this hope we quickened our march, encouraging and
helping one another.
Whenever we obtained food I offered my share to the men.
Sometimes we divided a few pounds of maize among the whole
unit. In such cases I often put the maize for my share into the
mouths of young soldiers and allayed my hunger with snow. But
how could snow give us any strength? We climbed up the slope
desperately through the snowstorm.
Han Hung Gwon aroused our curiosity by saying that snow
contained some nutritive substances. I thought the other men
would refute him. But few of them spoke out against him. Most of
them simply said that water might be more nutritious than snow, in
order to amuse Han Hung Gwon.
I also spoke to support them, trying not to throw cold water on
the joke which made them forget their hunger.
It was an ennobling though sad sight to see these men
endeavouring to endure their hardships by amusing themselves
with such a hypothesis.
I was told that during the long march of 25 thousand ri the
Chinese comrades boiled leather belts and drank the water. We
could also have done so, but we had no time to boil anything. Our
march was so arduous that sometimes I had to stiffen my resolve
by picturing in my mind the scenes in the novel Iron Flood which
535
I had read in Jilin.
Every night I stood sentry just like one of the men. In such a
crisis it would have been improper to do only the things that a
commander was supposed to do.
Just as the situation most urgently required the commander’s
abilities and skills of leadership, the men suffered another blow. I
caught a chill on Tianqiaoling, and it was so bad that I could
hardly walk. It was lack of food, sleep and rest that led to such a
serious state of affairs.
A high fever and a terrible fit of shivering at last felled me into
a snowdrift. If I had warmed myself at the campfire when I first
began to shiver with cold, the illness would not have become so
serious. But I ignored it for fear that my comrades-in-arms would
worry about me. Consequently my limbs became cramped and at
last I lost consciousness. I barely came to my senses, even after my
comrades-in-arms massaged my arms and legs for a long time.
I was told that if a person with this sickness drank a cup of
honey and warmed himself on a heated floor, he could sweat the
cold out, but it was impossible to expect such luxury in an
uninhabited wilderness at a height of 1,000 metres above sea level.
Han Hung Gwon and the men made a sleigh and spread a
blanket of fur on it. My comrades seated me on the sleigh,
wrapped me in a blanket and a roe deer skin, and took turns to pull
the sleigh. They were so anxious for my safety that they felt like
praying to God to halt the enemy’s pursuit, but the enemy
remained obdurate. To cross steep mountains while containing the
536
enemy’s pursuit and pulling my sleigh was exhausting mental and
physical toil.
Yoshizaki reinforced his pursuing troops with Kuto’s company.
Kuto was known as the “king of punitive operation.” He was
awarded the title of “war hero” after his death for his merited
services in Manchuria. The remains of this “war hero” are said to
have been preserved in the Yasukuni Shrine. When he appeared in
Tianqiaoling Kuto gave his men the following orders: Kim Il Sung
has lost his ability to command due to his serious illness. So we
need not attack him. Simply pursue his unit until they are
exhausted. Pick them off one by one while pursuing them. That
way we will kill all his communist army within a month.
Using this tactic Kuto removed many of our men from the battle
roll. The enemy’s marksmanship was remarkable.
When I recovered consciousness, I saw only 16 men around me.
I strained my eyes to look for more of them, but there were only
16. Where had the other comrades gone? Were those priceless
comrades buried under the snow of Tianqiaoling? Such fancies
sometimes flitted through my mind.
“Where is Wang Tae Hung?”
I was so parched with thirst that I could not make myself heard.
So I drew out my Mauser from under the blanket and wrote letters
on the snow with its handle. I looked up feebly at the company
commander, Han Hung Gwon. He hung his head instead of giving
an answer. I saw his Adam’s apple moving up and down under his
bearded jaw.
537
“The comrade political instructor fell in action,” replied the
platoon leader, Kim Thaek Gun, in a tearful voice. He was the man
who had taken such great pains to nurse me when I was struck
down by an eruptive typhus in Shiliping. His face, too, was bushy
with a beard. Tear drops were trickling from his eyes.
When we were encircled by the enemy, the company political
instructor, Wang Tae Hung, had formed a death-defying squad
with Kim Thaek Gun and several other comrades, and they had
fought hand-to-hand in an attempt to break through the
surrounding enemy. He felled five enemy soldiers using his
bayonet and the butt of his rifle. Then he, too, fell into the snow,
never to rise again.
Wang Tae Hung was one of my most beloved military and
political workers, as well as a brilliant fighter respected by
everyone. Because his name was like a Chinese name and he
spoke Chinese as fluently as Korean, people often took him for a
Chinese, but he was a pure Korean. He played his part in helping
the army and the people of north Manchuria. His fluent Chinese
had made him welcome to Chinese people wherever he went. It
was not without reason that Zhou Bao-zhong had insisted to have
him under his command.
I regretted now not having left him with Zhou.... I mourned
bitterly for my departed comrades-in-arms, feeling as if my soul
and body were torn apart.
“The situation was so critical that we could not bury the
comrade political instructor’s body.” The mournful and remorseful
538
voice of the platoon leader, Kim Thaek Gun, rang in my ears.
“There is plenty of snow here in north Manchuria. You could at
least have buried his body in snow.” The words were on the tip of
my tongue. But the power of reason suppressed them.
Kim Thaek Gun had known very well what he should do, but
the situation had been too pressing for the generous man to bury
his dead comrade.
I wrote on the snow again using the handle of the Mauser.
“Do you remember the valley where Wang died?”
“Yes, how can I forget it?” replied Kim Thaek Gun.
“Well, when the thaw sets in we will come to bury him.”
Whenever I wrote on the snow, the men moved the sleigh ahead
little by little so that the letters would not overlap one another.
But we were not able to go back to Wang.
Many other comrades-in-arms also lay unburied there on
Tianqiao- ling. When I recall them, I still feel my heart rending
asunder. I feel that I owe a debt which I can never pay. How can I
express my regret?
After liberation, when Jo Ki Chon completed his epic poem Mt.
Paektu, he first called on me to show me his manuscript. I was the
first to listen to his poem. Of course, his poetry was composed of
jewel-like sentences, but I was fascinated by the content. Many
passages of his poem touched my heartstrings.
You woodcutter, who works these mighty cliffs,
Cut carefully the trunks of these great trees—
539
Here in the wood they watch over the souls
Of warriors who died to save their country.
You traveller upon these grandiose peaks,
Touch not the rocks that lie along the road—
Beneath them—who can tell?—there yet may lie
The skeletons of warriors who died to save their people.
In this passage the writer expressed powerful feeling in
describing the emotions of the political worker, Chol Ho, as he
crossed the Amnok River to work in the homeland, after burying
Yong Nam who was shot by the enemy.
As Jo Ki Chon chanted this passage both he and I shed tears.
Listening to this passage I recalled the many Wang Tae Hungs
whom we had left unburied in north Manchuria, as well as many
Tianqiaolings. The skeletons of many of our revolutionary
precursors and comrades-in-arms lie buried in the fields,
mountains and rivers of Manchuria.
When I was Premier I once heard a story from a senior official
of the Ministry of Education.
One day, a professor of the history faculty of Kim Il Sung
University met with a wartime comrade-in-arms at his house. They
chatted and reminisced over their old friendship. The guest made
friends with the professor’s only son, who was a kindergarten
toddler. The boy was sitting on the guest’s lap, fingering his collar,
buttons and ribbons. When he touched the guest’s hand, the boy
got a shock.
540
It was an artificial hand, so it was not warm and it had no blood.
“Uncle, why is your hand like this?” the boy asked, holding the
artificial hand in his.
“It had to be amputated because it was wounded in the war
against the Americans.”
“Do People’s Army soldiers get wounded?”
“They may get wounded, and sometimes they may be killed.”
When he heard this, the boy grew sulky. He did not believe that
People’s Army soldiers might be wounded or killed, because he
believed that they never should be. The guest had offended the
child’s belief.
Until that time our illustrated books and films for children showed
many enemy soldiers being killed, but very few People’s Army
soldiers, and so the children had believed that the soldiers of the
People’s Army or the Anti-Japanese People’s Guerrilla Army could
never be wounded or killed.
Our educators and writers have not taught the younger
generation just how many lives were lost for the sake of victory in
the revolutionary wars against the US and Japanese imperialists.
We scaled the peak of victory in the great anti-Japanese war by
enduring indescribable hardships and building a staircase out of
the dead bodies of our comrades.
How could there possibly not be any sacrifice in the fight
against this formidable enemy, the imperialists, who are deaf to
any appeal or petition and are immune to terrorism? Death does
not discriminate between friend and foe, between justice and
541
injustice. The only difference is in its significance; the death of a
revolutionary soldier saves ten lives, the deaths of ten soldiers—a
hundred lives, of a hundred soldiers—a thousand lives. That is the
significance of the death of revolutionary soldiers.
Shortly after I heard about Wang’s death I fainted again. I was
suffering from a high fever, feeling as if my whole body were
burning and this was accompanied by a dim state of consciousness
in which I could not distinguish reality, dream and hallucination.
I was crossing Oga Mountain Pass, carrying a stretcher with
Wang Tae Hung. On the stretcher Cha Kwang Su and Zhou Baozhong lay side by side with their heads on their arms. Strangely
enough, I have never thought of Cha and Wang as being dead.
Living men mix quite easily with the dead men and it is not in the
least awkward. We have a long way to go and there is a high pass
before us, but under the scorching sun of summer we breathe hard
and feel very thirsty. The higher we climb up the mountain the
more thirsty we feel. When my patience runs out I run to a pool
and try to drink the still water. At that moment I hear a familiar
voice saying, “Don’t drink!” My mother, dressed in white clothes,
together with my younger brother Yong Ju, is standing on the pass
waving her hand. “Don’t drink, that water’s poisoned,” says my
mother. Looking into the water I am surprised. The pool is teeming
with tadpoles the size of grapes. Why does she say the water is
poisonous? To my eyes it looks like honey water or the clean
water in the well at daybreak. I lie on my belly to drink the water.
At that moment my mother warns me a second time. “I said you
542
must not drink!”
I was awakened by her warning. I looked up at the mountain
pass, but I could not see either my mother or my brother.
No doubt it was only a dream, but it was a voice calling me
which broke my dream.
“Brother Song Ju, for goodness’ sake, open your eyes and come
to. If you do not rise, our country will never rise again.”
At the sound of this voice I recovered consciousness. Someone
was looking full in my face, bending his body over the sleigh. It
was Wal Ryong, a Young Communist League member, who had
followed me, copying papers for me and helping me in other work,
since the days when I worked in Jilin.
The snow-covered forest reflecting the bloody colour of the
setting sun was gliding past behind the sleigh. The cold twilight
sky was spinning above my head. Wal Ryong followed the sleigh
calling me “Brother Song Ju, Brother Song Ju,” tears trickling
from his eyes. And another man, apparently O Tae Song, threw
himself upon me and cried.
“Comrade Commander, if you die, Korea will be hopeless.”
My comrades-in-arms who had been walking silently in front of
and behind the sleigh burst into tears all at once. I wished to tell
them not to cry, but I could not open my mouth. I was crying, too.
And then, I lost consciousness and lapsed into a coma.
The next morning, when I regained consciousness and opened
my eyes, free for a short while from the high fever, I saw the
sleigh was in an open place and my 16 comrades were collapsed
543
around it.
They were no longer in a position to take care of me. Instead, I
had to console them. They were exhausted from hunger, thirst and
ceaseless fighting for many days. They had endured innumerable
hardships to save my life. For years we had triumphed over
indescribable ordeals in Jiandao, but I had never seen them so
haggard and so ragged as they were now.
My heart was heavy as I thought that we still had a long way to
go, but these comrades, once so strong, were now so completely
exhausted that they had collapsed on the ground. What was to be
done? Had they any strength to rise again and return to Wangqing?
They might be buried in this snowstorm for ever. What could I do
if I were left alive alone? I had been able to fight all along,
triumphing over every trial under the anti-Japanese banner,
because they had looked up to me and supported me and because I
had believed in them and relied on their strength in my struggle.
Without them I could neither survive nor carry through the
revolution. As they had saved my life, I must save their lives. Only
when I rose again could I rescue them from graves in the snow and
carry on with the revolution. But I did not have the strength to lift
a finger. Alas! What could be done?
My consciousness dimmed again, as if shrouded in mist. I felt
my heart breaking in frustration at the thought that the cause of my
life for the sake of which I had soared in the blue sky like a
fearless phoenix, was going to end here, with my wings clipped.
Suddenly I felt alarmed at the thought that if we could not get to
544
our feet again, our people, who looked up to us in the hope of
national resurrection, would be grieved and disappointed. I
trembled as if I had suffered an electric shock.
The Japanese imperialists would gloat over the grief of the
Korean nation, and would take pleasure in our despair. If we went
down on our knees, the millionaires and militarists of Japan would
be delighted. The Japanese imperialists were waiting for us to
starve and freeze to death or surrender to them in despair. History
had not yet given us the right to die. If we became a handful of dirt
without fulfilling our duty to history and the times, we would be
unfilial sons not only to our families, but also to the nation that
gave us birth and brought us up. We would never be unfilial sons.
I continued to think, raising myself by rubbing my drooping
eyelids with snow dust.
If our revolutionary army disappeared for ever, buried in the
snow and ice on Tianqiaoling, the Japanese repression of our
people would grow still more oppressive, ten or a hundred times
worse. The Japanese imperialists were making frantic efforts to
exploit our people and make our nation their Emperor’s subject
even as we fought against them.
The Japanese imperialists were exploiting the Korean nation in
order to recoup the losses caused by the economic blockade
imposed upon them following Japan’s withdrawal from the League
of Nations in 1933. The plan for the increased production of grain
and the policy of increased production of cotton and silk enforced
by governor-general Saito in the 1920s accelerated the class
545
differentiation of the Korean rural communities and forced many
of peasants to desert their farmland and villages as paupers; the
policy of industrializing Korea, the policy of encouraging gold
production and the policy of producing cotton in the south and
sheep in the north being applied by governor-general Ukaki were
transforming the poor economy of our country into an appendix to
the Japanese war economy. Steel, coal, cotton and sheep were all
shipped to Japan to increase her wealth and to strengthen her
armed forces.
The Korean language had been reduced to the status of a
dialect. Progressive books were subjected to Japanese censorship.
There were increasing numbers of military-drill grounds and
prisons in the homeland. It was said that the notorious bloodstained Sodaemun prison in Seoul was being expanded because it
was overflowing with our patriots. Japan’s monopolists, warlords
and their stooges were in crazed pursuit of the ideal of militarism,
in their ambition to conquer the world. The Sino-Japanese war
would break out any time now. It depended on when the Japanese
warlords pulled the trigger. Because of the German and Japanese
fascists, black clouds were gathering over the west and the east,
threatening a new world war. When the counterrevolution was so
rampant, how could we revolutionaries, who were resolved to
defeat it, linger in despair, lamenting over our present adversity?
Even if the sky fell we had to do everything we could to stay
alive and carry through the revolution. If we did not return alive,
who could manage the piles of work in east Manchuria which was
546
awaiting our return? If we sank to our knees here, the Korean
people would become the lifelong slaves of the Japanese
imperialists.
Suddenly a poetic thought flashed in upon me. It was just the
concept of a poem which became the song known nowadays as the
Song of the Anti-Japanese War.
Louder is the sound of Japanese combat boots
Trampling upon our lovely land
Humiliating tens of millions of our people
Murdering, plundering and committing arson.
My parents, your brothers and their wives and children
Are shedding blood at the point of the Japs’ bayonet.
My house and your farmland are reduced
To ashes and desert land by the enemy.
...
Rise and unite, the working masses
Do not betray our firm resolve, fight on.
Let’s shout hurrahs of triumph
After defeating white terrorism under the red flag.
I shook Wal Ryong, who was lying near the sleigh, sat him up,
and dictated the words of the song to him. Wal Ryong and I were
the first to sing this song. One after another my comrades rose and
547
we sang together.
At about ten o’clock in the morning, we found the timber mill
in Xipailinzi. We entered it hungry even for maize gruel and
hoping to sweat out our chill.
That day my fever went over 40 degrees C. The only remedy in
our situation was to eat maize gruel and drink Chinese liquor
mixed with raw sugar.
If I sweated it out I would feel better, but I had been shivering
with cold on the sleigh for a long time, so my illness was going
from bad to worse every moment. Watching me suffer high fever
and coma, my comrades felt our expeditionary force had no hope
of finding a way out. Nobody felt that we would escape this crisis
and return to Wangqing. They had apparently concluded that we
had failed and they left absolutely everything to the company
commander, Han Hung Gwon.
Han asked old man Kim, an employee at the timber mill, to boil
up maize gruel. At that time we had eaten nothing for whole two
days. At first my comrades took this old man for a Chinese
because he was dressed in Chinese clothes and spoke in Chinese.
When he learned that we were Korean guerrillas from Jiandao, the
old man said that he was a Korean. He also said that his son was
Kim Hae San, a commander of the guerrilla unit fighting in
Badaohezi.
Kim Hae San was one of the participants in the winter
Mingyuegou meeting in 1931. After sending his son to the
guerrilla army, old man Kim raised crops on the mountain in
548
summer to earn his bread and did odd jobs in the timber mill in
winter in order to buy salt, cooking oil and the like.
Shortly after our exchange of greetings with the old man, Han
Hung Gwon received a report from the reconnaissance party that
the enemy’s “punitive” troops were approaching the timber mill.
At that moment Wal Ryong was boiling water for me on the
fireplace in a pan without a lid, while drying my wet shoes. He
cried to think that all was lost now that the commander was not
recovering and there was no chance for us to break through the
enemy encirclement. When he left Jilin after me his resolve had
been really firm. He said that he would die if I died.
Old man Kim came into the kitchen with firewood in his arms
and asked him why he was crying.
“The commander is ill... the ‘punitive’ troops have encircled us
ring upon ring... within the hour they will rush into this mill, but
we cannot find a way out. That’s why I am crying. If we are to
escape we must cross the river.... The river is deep and not frozen,
so we cannot cross it. The other way for us to escape is to cross the
bridge, but a company of the ‘punitive’ troops is keeping watch
there. We are surrounded on all sides by the enemy.”
Having heard Wal Ryong’s complaint, the old man suggested to
him a brilliant idea for breaking through the encirclement. “Young
man, don’t worry too much. While there’s life there’s hope. My
master is a stooge of Manchukuo. He will come here soon. If he
does you can arrest him. You must force him to lie to the
‘punitive’ troops so that they will not come to the timber mill.
549
Then you can stay here until evening. The next step can be
discussed in the evening.”
Wal Ryong reported Kim’s words to Han Hung Gwon. Han
talked with the old man on behalf of our party and they worked out
a plan of escape.
Han followed the old man’s advice, tying up the master of the
mill and criticizing him.
“You scoundrel, who allowed you to manage a timber mill? We
have never recognized the state of Manchukuo. If you want to
make up for your crime you must spare no effort to assist our
army. How much will you contribute?”
From the very outset the master was submissive, intimidated by
Han’s bluff, and by his tall and masculine figure which almost
reached up to the ceiling.
“Yes, I will... as much as you want.”
Han Hung Gwon made such preposterous demands in terms of
clothes, pigs and bags of wheat flour that the master almost fainted
away when he was asked if he could contribute that amount.
“If you spare me, I will try to dissuade the ‘punitive’ troops
from coming here while you are here.”
“Tell me how you will dissuade them.”
“I will say that the guerrillas escaped to somewhere else.
Because I am on intimate terms with the officers of the ‘punitive’
troops they will trust me.”
“If you meet our demands we may forgive you. Our aim is to
defeat the Japanese. If you want to atone for your crime and fight
550
the Japanese, you must help us.”
“I will, just as you demand. You only have to release me.”
The Chinese timber mill owner was so clever that he read our
minds right away. He knew we did not covet his wealth, but only
wanted to break through the encirclement and escape from danger.
When the master asked who the commander was, Han replied that
he was the commander in order to keep my identity secret.
Pointing at me the master asked, “What’s the matter with him?”
Han said ambiguously that I was in bed because I was feeling
unwell.
The master kept his promise. Thanks to his false information
the “punitive” troops had still not appeared in the timber mill by
dusk. At the mill we took one meal for breakfast and lunch and
had supper in the evening. There was even pork on the supper
table. Because I had lost my appetite I only drank maize gruel to
allay my thirst.
After supper old man Kim proposed a second plan for our
escape. It was another brilliant idea.
“The only problem is to get across the bridge, but that is very
dangerous. Some clever move is needed. One way is to pass the
sentry post by trickery, the other is to take the master to the bridge
with you and make him deceive the sentries there. If they try to
search you, you must not hesitate to knock them down and go
across the bridge. After that you can climb the mountain with
Commander Kim on your back. About five miles down from the
bridge there is a deep ravine where you will find a small valley. At
551
the end of this valley there are three houses in which Koreans live.
They went there to escape from the Japanese and they cultivate the
land. I was told that they have not listed their names in the
Manchukuo census records. With their help you will have no
difficulty in treating Commander Kim.”
Han Hung Gwon agreed with his suggestion, which pleased the
old man. He added yet another plan.
“If anything unexpected happens while you’re crossing the
bridge, the platoon leader should hold off the enemy while the rest
follow me. As company commander you must follow me carrying
Commander Kim on your back, because you are tall and strong. If
we cross the bridge, everything will go well even if the enemy
pursue us, because I know the mountain inside out. If we cross the
bridge without any incident, some of you can take the master and
me somewhere close to the Ningan county town. And beat me a
little and threaten the master.... Meanwhile the rest of you, with the
company commander, should carry Commander Kim into the
valley.”
Han listened to what the old man said and then related his plan
to me. I thought the plan was ideal.
Although he was not a military expert, the old man was a bold
operation planner, the equal of a volunteer army commander. This
father of a guerrilla army commander was a quite uncommon
person. His plan for our escape was a brilliant idea which the
average commanding officer could scarcely have conceived. Once
again on that occasion I learned that the brains of our people were
552
a fount of wisdom which could discover a solution for any
difficulty in the world. My faith that in times of difficulty we must
go among the people has been derived from such experiences.
I left everything to Han Hung Gwon, saying that as I was a
helpless invalid he should deal with everything as he considered
appropriate. When night fell, Han demanded that the master
prepare five horse-drawn sleighs. There were many horses in the
timber mill. Platoon leader Kim Thaek Gun, a brilliant fighter,
took the first sleigh together with the master, and I sat on the third
sleigh.
The sentries of the Japanese and Manchurian mixed unit saw us
and challenged us from the darkness, “Who goes there?” As we
had instructed him, the master said calmly, “My men are ill and I
am taking them to hospital, and I am going to Ningan to buy
something.”
The sentries recognized the master’s voice and shouted “Pass!”
without even approaching the sleigh.
The five horse-drawn sleighs crossed the bridge at a lightning
speed. The sleigh bumped so terribly that the vibration of the
wooden bridge shook me even through the fur on which I was
sitting. Under the bridge the river was roaring in full spate. This
river was a major tributary of the River Mudan.
“That’s well done! May it never be otherwise.”
After the sleighs had crossed the bridge old man Kim embraced
Han for joy.
This adventure, which was like some legend or detective story,
553
ended well for us, the next stage also going smoothly, as we had
planned. But for old man Kim, I would not have been plucked
from the jaws of death, and together with me the expeditionary
force would have been destroyed there in the backwoods of
Tianqiaoling. The old man did us a great service. He was a kindhearted person who helped us without flinching from sacrifice, a
worthy father of a guerrilla army commander.
It was strange that whenever my life was in danger benefactors
such as old man Kim would appear before me and save me at the
critical moment. A housewife in Jiaohe, whose name I had no
opportunity to ask, protected me from being arrested by the enemy
and old man Ma afforded me and my comrades a chance to relax
after we had suffered hunger and cold on the heights of Luozigou.
And now old man Kim, whom we had never seen before, had
saved the expeditionary force and its commander from destruction
on Tianqiaoling.
When I tell this story some people say that I was lucky. But
some others regard it as fate. They do not consider it luck when
benefactors appear to help patriots who devote their all to the
country and the people. I would not wish to say who is right and
who is wrong. Because on many occasions in my life I have
received aid from benefactors, I can say that luck has always been
on my side. It is natural that the luck should be generous to men
who devote their lives to the people.
If the people had not known that our guerrilla army was an
armed force of righteous men fighting for human emancipation,
554
and if the image of the guerrilla army had not left a mark of
nobility and beauty in the people’s minds, we would not have been
helped by old man Kim on Tianqiaoling, and such a mysterious
story as the incident on Tianqiaoling would have never been
recorded in the annals of the anti-Japanese revolutionary struggle.
555
6. In the Bosom of the People
On that fateful night, when we successfully passed three sentry
posts, we camped between the walls of a roofless burnt-out house
in the Dawaizi valley. My comrades spent one night and one day
nursing me in this ruin. Their nursing was far from qualified
medical care. They just built a campfire and sat around it, taking
turns to massage my arms and legs.
Next morning, some of my 16 men wandered over the mountain
ridges in search of the houses of the Koreans who were said to be
living there without registering names in the Manchukuo census
records. However, it proved no easy job to locate the refuges of
people who had turned their backs on the world in order to avoid
observation by the Japanese army and police and Manchurian
government officials. At midnight they found a log-cabin on the
mountainside of Laoyeling amid dense primeval forest of pine-nut
trees, white birches and Abies nephroleps. This was the house of
old man Jo Thaek Ju which has become well-known among our
people as the “solitary house at Dawaizi.” Choe Il Hwa, the author
of the reminiscences “Long Life and Good Health to the Leader,”
556
was the eldest daughter-in-law of old man Jo.
On a ledge midway up the mountain ridge there were two
single-room log-cabins separated by a ditch between, as like each
other as twins in size and form. Old man Jo’s nine-member family
lived in the cabin north of the ditch—his wife, his eldest son Jo
Uk, his daughter-in-law and his grandchildren. His second son Jo
Kyong’s five-member family lived in the other cabin, south of the
ditch. The eaves were too low; these were more like dugouts than
log-cabins. Their roofs were covered thickly with earth on which
several young pine trees were planted to camouflage their
existence. This camouflage gave our reconnaissance party a lot of
trouble in finding them as they wandered about the mountain.
Travellers passing through Laoyeling had never known of these
shelters inhabited by people with an unusual outlook on life, who
hid their very existence from the world. Only three liaison agents
who travelled between north and east Manchuria knew the location
of these shelters. Our reconnaissance party hardly had time to
explain why they had come before old man Jo shouted to his son
Jo Uk and grandson Jo Yong Son to bring guerrillas there right
away, saying that even if the sky fell, Commander Kim Il Sung
could not be left to suffer from this serious chill. He asked his
daughter-in-law Choe Il Hwa to boil some water and prepare thin
gruel.
From the Jo’s house to the ruined house where we were was
more than five miles by the shortest route. When Jo Uk and Jo
Yong Son arrived at our camp with our reconnaissance party, my
557
men were sitting around the campfire boiling water for me, and I
was in a coma. They took me on their backs and set out for Jo’s
house. Wal Ryong brought up the rear erasing our footprints with
pine twigs.
Old man Jo who had known the sweet and bitter sides of life
from childhood, asked a few questions of company commander
Han and said that my disease was a cold fit, a serious illness
caused by fatigue and lack of nourishment and that it could be lifethreatening, but I would recover within three days if I got warm
and sweated out. He added that the treatment of this disease
required absolute rest.
“The reason why Commander Kim has not recovered
consciousness so far is that the blood is not circulating smoothly in
his body. If the blood circulation improves he will get better. So
don’t worry, go and relax in my second son’s house,” the old man
said to company commander Han, as he and his daughter-in-law
massaged my arms and legs.
These words lifted my men’s spirits. Their faces had been long
from worry about, since I had been totally incapacitated for several
days.
Accompanied by Jo Yong Son, the soldiers crossed the ditch to
Jo Kyong’s house. Old man Jo’s family and my two bodyguards
stayed with me.
After giving me boiled water mixed with half a bowl of honey,
the old man watched the reactions of my body, sometimes feeling
my forehead. Some time later he offered me thin gruel mixed with
558
honey. My bodyguards, who nursed me that night together with
old man Jo, said later that after I took the gruel some colour
returned to my face and I awoke from the comatose state in which
I had not been able to distinguish dream and reality. I felt
refreshed, as if I were breathing the air of a balmy spring day, and
my body and soul felt as buoyant as a flake of down. Around me I
saw no sleigh covered with fur, no more of the snow-covered
forest scenery through which we had made our tedious journey, no
snowstorm, no coldness and no ear-splitting cracks as the pursuing
enemy shot at us. Nor was there any more splitting headache, chill
and high fever. How could this be? What had made such a clean
sweep of the disease which had brought me to the threshold of
death and caused me untold distress?
I gathered myself and strained my ears to hear the sound of the
wind brushing against the window. The buzzing of the flaps of the
papered window was like the sound of the biplane which we had
encountered on a mountain peak in Laoyeling when we were
leaving Duitoulazi. My eyes met the gaze of a strange old man,
looking down at me with gentle eyes under his grey eyebrows.
In the old man’s calloused hand, which was lightly holding my
right wrist, I felt the warmth of my grandfather’s hand in
Mangyongdae as he touched my forehead and cheeks in my
childhood.
“Where am I?” I quietly asked this mysterious old man who
was watching over me.
My simple question produced such a strong reaction on the old
559
man’s face that I cannot describe it in words, written or spoken.
The placid smile on his lips instantly extended to his cheeks and
eyes, bringing a mysterious radiance to the wrinkled face of this
old man who was as soft and unsophisticated as a ploughed field.
It seemed I had never seen such a pure and trustworthy man before
in my life.
Wal Ryong, who was sitting beside the old man, burst into tears
and reported in a single breath how our expeditionary force had
survived the crisis and reached this Dawaizi valley from the timber
mill in Xipailinzi.
“Thank you, grandfather. I owe my life to your family.”
“Don’t mention it. God gave birth to you General Kim, and you
have been saved in this log-cabin by God’s will, not by my
family.”
The old man raised his head and looked up at the ceiling as if I
had really come from the sky. His compliment made me feel
awkward.
“Grandfather, I don’t think I’m worthy of your compliment. It
is too much to compare me with a general born of the Divine will.
I am the son and grandson of the common people; I was born into
a nameless peasant family. As a soldier of Korea my services have
been too little.”
“You are too modest. The whole world knows what
distinguished services you have rendered in war. I am a mere
ignoramus who makes a bare living tilling plots at land in these
backwoods, but I have heard all the news going the rounds of the
560
three provinces of northeast China. Hey, my boys, this is the
famous General Kim, who attacked the Dongning county town in
the autumn of the year before last, leading the Korean army and
Commander Wu’s unit. Come here and bow to him.”
The old man spoke in a passionate tone to his children as they
came in through the kitchen door, together with the guerrillas who
had woken up from their sound sleep at dawn to be told by Wal
Ryong that I had regained consciousness. I sat up under the
blanket and accepted their salutations.
In this log-cabin on a remote mountain the location of which
was not even registered in the government census record, which
even the postman did not visit, laughter filled the room at that
ungodly hour.
“We are now merrily laughing,” the platoon leader, Kim Thaek
Gun, said with tears in his eyes. “But when we suffered great
hardships, surrounded by the enemy, we thought we had no hope.
We thought we would all die.”
“You comrades made great efforts for my sake. It is lucky that
you at least have survived. I will never forget your devotion and
your heroism until my hair turns grey.”
I would never forget the way my comrades-in-arms looked at
me with tears in their eyes. That image from 50 years ago is still
fresh in my memory. But I have forgotten the names of half of
them. I would greatly love to hand down at least their names to
posterity, but my poor memory betrays me. These 16 names have
been buried among thousands of names of people connected with
561
me directly or indirectly over half a century. In order to recollect
all the names which have been buried in the history of the antiJapanese revolution, we would need a full historical record. But
unfortunately we do not have such a record. We did not take up
weapons to fight in the anti-Japanese war in order to leave our
names in the historical record, but in order to create a new age in
which the working masses would be masters.
However, I cannot justify myself with such excuses. I am a
former guerrilla army commander who has forgotten the names of
half of those comrades-in-arms who snatched me from the jaws of
death.
“Grandfather, what is your native district? Why were you
driven out into such a remote place?”
Setting my hand on his rake-like hand, on which the veins stood
out clearly, I looked tenderly at his wrinkled face, which seemed to
reflect the political history of half a century.
“My native district is Samjang Sub-county, Musan County. I
was unable to endure the depredations of the Japanese, and left my
native land at the age of twenty-nine and came to Helong,” replied
the old man sadly.
After he crossed the Tuman River, the old man had been a
tenant farmer for about 30 years. Two years after the June Tenth
Independence Movement Jo’s family crossed the Laoyeling
Mountains and began to reclaim barren land registered for the
Japanese rice field project.
The severe trials suffered by an ill-fated peasant family as part
562
of the history of a ruined nation flashed before my eyes like a film
on a screen.
After crossing the Laoyeling Mountains old man Jo drove fence
stakes and laid foundation stones in the Dawaizi village, where
three Korean families and five Chinese families lived. Aftrerwards
the number of Korean houses increased to ten. In this remote
mountain village, too, the Anti-Japanese Self-Defence Corps, the
women’s association, the Children’s Vanguard and the Children’s
Corps organizations began to strike root. But the backlash of the
September 18 incident swept away all these organizations. The
“punitive” operations reduced the village to ashes.
The people built new houses on the sites of the burnt ones and
continued determinedly building up their lives. In the spring of
1933, their houses were once again enveloped in flames and some
people were burnt to death.
In the spring of 1934, Jo Thaek Ju’s family built a log-cabin
deep in the mountain of Laoyeling, approximately seven miles
away from Dawaizi and then moved into it. This was the house in
which I began to recover after drinking foxtail millet gruel mixed
with honey. His nine-member family built a hut at the entrance of
the valley five miles away from the log-cabin and tilled mountain
plots there. In the farming season, when they were shorthanded,
the whole family slept and took their meals in the hut to save time.
They harvested the crops as soon as they were ripe and carried
them on their backs to the log-cabin, where they stored the grains
in a cellar, hulling them with a tread-mill little by little just before
563
eating them.
Old man Jo was satisfied with this simple, primitive selfsupporting economy. His family only went to the Ningan county
town when they needed to barter. They could not avoid these trips
to the market if they were to obtain such goods as clothes,
footwear, matches, salt, needles, thread and the like. This was their
only connection with the outer world. Urban civilization came
nowhere near the spot at the end of the world, where there was no
road, no horses, no vehicles, no electricity. The children were
totally isolated from education. Old man Jo’s admonitions took the
place of classes, and mother Choe Il Hwa’s old stories and songs,
which could be counted on one’s fingers, were all the literature
and art they could enjoy.
“Grandfather, are you not lonely in this remote mountain?” I
asked the old man feeling a deep emotion close to resentment for
him.
The old man smiled sadly at my question.
“The loneliness is beyond description. But because we can
avoid the disgusting Japs, we feel we live on the fat of the land.
The paradise of Ryultoguk2 cannot be better than here.”
The word Ryultoguk shocked me. How could this god-forsaken
place be compared with Ryultoguk? Had the ideal of the Korean
nation fallen down such depths? Japan was sending her emigrants
to colonize the fertile lands of Korea, and our compatriots had
been driven into a closed mountain valley like some mousehole in
desolate Manchuria. What prison could be more terrible than this
564
place?
Yes, it was undoubtedly a prison. It differed from a common
prison only in that it had no warder and no fence of its own. The
warder of this prison was the army and the police of Japan and
Manchukuo and the fence was their threats. Old man Jo took the
anachronistic view that this prison was Ryultoguk in order to
console himself.
His thinking that the prison where he was detained was a
paradise disappointed me. I thought that if every Korean tolerated
reality as old man Jo did, Korea could never be restored.
“Grandfather, the fate of Koreans has become so miserable that
you call this place a Ryultoguk. Samsu and Kapsan which are
known as places of exile, could not be more desolate than here. As
long as the Japanese are entrenched in Korea and Manchuria,
Ryultoguk and the reign of peace are inconceivable for us. You
must know that someday the ‘punitive’ troops will enter this
valley, too.”
I opened my heart though I knew that the old man might be
upset by my words. Old man Jo twitched his eyebrows and looked
at me for a while with sad eyes.
“If those devils attack even this valley there will be no place left
for Koreans to live. Damn it! What terrible evils torment our
people.... Whenever I had to move to a new place I cursed the five
ministers17 who sold our country.”
This was what old man Jo and I talked about that dawn.
Beginning the next day I left my bed to take a walk and to read.
565
A few days later I began doing some light manual work. In the
daytime I gave military and political classes and in the evening I
took part in a concert with my men. Whenever we had a concert,
the two or three men who were staying at the old man Jo’s house
took me across the ditch to Jo Kyong’s house. In these narrow and
gloomy mountain refuges, the guerrillas abided strictly by their
daily routine, just as they had done in Wangqing.
Three or four days later I was ready to order our departure. I
had thought that it was unreasonable and went against common
sense for a number of able-bodied men greater than the 14
members of the family to be living on them and taking so much
out of their poor living earned from slash-and-burn tillage.
But company commander Han Hung Gwon objected to my
decision. He dissuaded me persistently, saying that exposing
myself to cold again after suffering from a cold fit would be
tantamount to suicide, and he could not consent to such an
adventure. He even dissuaded me from going for walks in the
forest.
The food grain which about 20 able-bodied men consumed in
taking three meals a day was by no means a small amount. Even at
the rate of the daily rations supplied to a grown-up nowadays, we
would have consumed four straw-sacks of grain if we stayed for 20
days. In any case, we ate most of this family’s food.
However, old man Jo neither showed any reluctance nor
betrayed in any expression of his face the burden which he had
shouldered for our sake. On the contrary, when we said that we
566
were sorry to have caused him so much trouble, he never allowed
us to continue saying that it was the duty and job of the people to
support the army of their country, and it could not be a burden. He
was really a very large-hearted old man.
Mother Choe Il Hwa, too, was very kind-hearted. Because her
family were slash-and-burn farmers they had no rice, but she
cooked food which tempted our appetites three times a day using
foxtail millet, beans, barley, oats and potatoes. Sometimes she
served ground bean mash and coarse bean curd boiled in bean
paste. She was sorry that she could not serve me meat to restore
my strength after my illness.
“I have not raised any domestic animals for fear that our house
would be discovered, but now I really regret not having raised an
animal. If we had at least a chicken I would cook it and serve it to
you General.... I would gladly travel dozens of miles to buy meat,
but I cannot, for fear of the mad ‘punitive’ troops. How cruel the
world is....”
The heartfelt kindness I sensed in her harsh yet generous voice
was exceptionally warm and profound.
“Mother, when you say things like that I feel awful. I am a son
of the common people who knows what is it to live on vegetables
and dried-radish-leaf soup. So you need not worry about meat.
You said that you were sorry you could prepare only coarse bean
curd, because you had no brine, but I can feel putting on weight
from the coarse bean curd and ground bean mash.”
“I had been told that the menfolk of Phyongan Provinces are
567
hot-tempered, but you Commander are very tender-hearted. You
make me think that if I had a daughter I would marry her to a boy
from Phyongan Provinces. I want you to empty your bowl at every
meal, simple though the food may be, and recover your health
completely under this roof.”
Whenever I took a meal, the woman squatted anxiously in the
kitchen hearth. She worried that I might stop eating without
emptying all the bowls.
Even when I had no appetite, I used to eat up all the dishes on
the small table with cabrioles in response to her sincere concern.
Then a faint smile would appear on her lips.
These people’s sincere concern for us was quite pure. If such
sincerity were to be compared to a river, I would call it a “clear
stream” or “crystal-clear stream.” Such sincerity is boundless, it
cannot be measured by length or weight.
A man who enjoys the love of the people is happy, and a man
who does not is unhappy. This is the view of the nature of
happiness which I have maintained throughout my life. Just as in
the past, I still feel nowadays the greatest pride and joy in enjoying
the love of the people. I consider this the true meaning of life.
Only those who understand this true meaning can be the genuine
sons and faithful servants of the people.
Thanks to the sincere efforts of Jo Thaek Ju’s family I quickly
recovered my health. I frequently went for walks in spite of Han’s
warning. Sometimes I helped the family to chop firewood and
pound grains in a tread-mill.
568
More than ten days had passed since we entered the Dawaizi
valley and were granted the tender care of Jo’s family. I thought
we should return to the guerrilla zone. I felt as though many years
had passed since we left Wangqing. In fact we had left it only
three months before, but I was anxious to know what had been
happening in the guerrilla zone and what the zone would look like
when we returned to Wangqing. The future seemed uncertain to
me.
While we were working in the area around Badaohezi,
messengers from east Manchuria had warned us many times that a
purge had created some disturbance in the minds of the people in
Jiandao. Some of them complained that the struggle of the anti-
“Minsaengdan” clique was crushing the revolutionary base itself
and others said that if the purge was stepped up, the guerrilla zone
would collapse in a year or two.
I reaffirmed my resolve to return to the guerrilla zone and
eliminate the harmful consequences of the ultra-Leftist anti-
“Minsaengdan” struggle as soon as possible.
One day I walked for a while in the forest and then went back to
Jo Kyong’s house to announce my decision to company
commander Han Hung Gwon.
The company commander was sitting on a tree stump near the
house looking vacantly into the northern sky. When I saw him
sitting there as motionless as a wooden statue with his arms folded
on his chest, I felt he was wrapped in deep and heartbreaking
thought. When I came closer, Han stood up, rubbing his eyes.
569
When I saw his eyes were reddish, I was a little frightened. Had
something bothered him during the night? Or was this stouthearted man suffering from some agony which he could not reveal
to anyone?
“Company Commander, what is the matter so early in the
morning? You are not like the Han Hung Gwon I know.”
After asking this question I walked around him. For some
reason he watched me with a gloomy expression. He blinked
tearful eyes, heaved a deep sigh and said slowly:
“We had dozens of men when we began our march to north
Manchuria, but now only sixteen are left alive. What great efforts
we made to build up our company!”
With deep emotion we both recalled the days when we were
building up the 5th company. The 5th company had been
organized on the basis of some men from the 2nd Wangqing
company, which was in Shiliping. I went to the Luozigou area
leading a group of men from the 2nd company and increased the
ranks by recruiting young men there. This was the 5th company,
led by Han Hung Gwon.
The 5th Wangqing company was also under my personal
command. In the days when I commanded a battalion and a
regiment, I always took this company with me to harass the enemy
from behind his lines. The 5th company was one of the strongest
elite companies, among all the guerrilla units in east Manchuria
with rich combat experience. But this company now had to return
to the guerrilla zone, reduced to skin and bone after the loss of
570
many comrades. It was natural that Han should writhe in agony
and bury his head in his hands.
“When I think of the losses the 5th company has suffered, I,
too, feel my heart breaking. But I take comfort in the fact that we
gave great help to our comrades in north Manchuria. From that
point of view, we had great success, didn’t we? Comrade Hung
Gwon, this blood has not been spilt in vain. Let us extend our
ranks again and make the enemy pay a thousand fold for the blood
of our comrades-in-arms.”
The words I spoke to Han were also addressed to myself.
Han Hung Gwon continued looking up into the northern sky
with his lips tightly closed. A few words of consolation could not
heal the wound in his mind. The grief of a man was clearly beyond
measurement by depth and density.
His silence neither disappointed me nor offended me, but
merely doubled my trust in him.
A few days later I ordered the men to march, despite old man
Jo’s objections. As we lined up in front of the log-cabin to bid
farewell to the old man, our faces were grave.
“Grandfather, I came to this house on a man’s back, but now I
shall return to the guerrilla zone on my own two feet. But for your
family, I would not have recovered or survived. I will never forget
your kind help.”
I regretted my inability to find better words of gratitude for old
man Jo. The depth of my emotion seemed to be directly
proportional to my lack of command of language.
571
Old man Jo was upset by my words.
“I hardly deserve your compliments, for I have not even served
you a piece of meat. I am sorry I must say good-bye to you so
soon, Commander Kim. But I will not detain you because you
must leave for the sake of Korea. When the country has become
independent we will leave this mountain valley and return home.
We put all our trust in you Commander Kim.”
“We sons of Korea feel we are guilty of a serious crime when
we see you living in hiding in this foreign land where you came to
find a way to survive. But, grandfather, the day will surely come
when you will live in bright sunshine. When spring comes, the
enemy’s ‘punitive’ operation will become more violent and
gunshot will be heard frequently, even in this valley. You should
move towards Luozigou. You will be safer there, where the wind
of revolution blows strongly.”
After giving him this advice, I left the valley of Dawaizi.
Mother Choe Il Hwa had packed three days’ provisions for our
journey in our knapsacks. She had prepared them by pounding and
polishing foxtail millet and barley through the night. She also gave
us chilli bean paste and cooked rice balls wrapped in the white
birch bark to eat on the way. Her eldest son Jo Yong Son guided us
to Barengou, forcing his way through the deep snow in Laoyeling.
Some time later gunshots were frequently heard near Jo’s
house. Our prophecy came true. Jo’s family left Dawaizi in secret
one midnight with bundles of food and threadbare clothes and
moved to Taipinggou, where they became tenant farmers.
572
In June 1935, I met his family again in Taipinggou. An east
Manchurian expedition force which had annihilated a rabid Jingan
army unit in Laoheishan was staying in Xintunzi, near Taipinggou,
conducting vigorous work among the masses. We also sent able
political workers to Taipinggou. All of them had benefitted from
Jo’s hospitality at Dawaizi. They met old man Jo Thaek Ju on the
road by chance and reported to me about it.
I visited Jo’s house that very day. Half a year before I had been
carried unconscious to his house on the backs of my comrades. In
all the vast north Manchurian plain there were only 16 men, totally
exhausted, left in my company. But this time I called on the old
man in good health and in command of a large army. I wanted to
meet the benefactors who had saved me from death and taken
tender care of me with all the sincerity that a man could offer, but
the gift I was carrying with me was too small and too light to
express all my gratitude. All I had in my hands was a few pounds
of meat and some money with which his family could buy food for
a month or two. How good it would have been if the few pounds of
meat had been dozens of domestic animals and the money had
been an ox-cart laden with gold coins!
I was ashamed that I could not repay the full extent of my debt.
But I quickened my pace, full of vigour, my head held high. My
package may be small, but it was good luck for us to meet again
alive. It was a truly great happiness that both Jo’s family and I
were in good health.
In a small room which clearly betrayed poverty, the large
573
family of more than ten was living in rags, in dire misery, but they
welcomed me with a broad smile on their faces. I sat on the porch
with the old man and shared past experiences. He was curious to
know how the revolutionary army had destroyed the Jingan army
and I was concerned about the poverty of Jo’s family.
“Grandfather, how do you till the land and gather firewood
without an ox?”
This had been worrying me since my stay at Dawaizi.
“We do it ourselves, all fourteen of us working like a horse or
an ox, pulling the plough and carrying the firewood.”
He seemed exceptionally calm and objective as he spoke
without exaggeration of the poverty which he had suffered for 60
years, apparently regarding it as a matter of course.
“It must be a herculean task to support your large family.”
“Yes, it is a heavy task. But tilling the land is nothing compared
to the hardships you go through, General Kim. We are in good
spirits nowadays even though we are badly off.”
“Is there anything that makes you so happy?”
“We feel as if we had become rich because your army has
repeatedly defeated the Japs. When we hear news of the
revolutionary army destroying the enemy, we forget our hunger. I
had hardly any hope left when I saw you off in Dawaizi. I
wondered how an army the size of my family could possibly do
such great work. But yesterday I saw hundreds of your soldiers as
you returned in triumph from Laoheishan. I slapped my knee,
saying to myself, ‘Now everything will go well. Korea will surely
574
win!’ ”
When he lived in Dawaizi, the old man talked mostly about the
people’s welfare, but to my surprise he was now interested only in
the results of the revolutionary army’s battles. He had become a
different man in half a year. The feeble and nonresistant hermit
who had rejected the world and turned his back on it had changed
into an optimist who lived in hopes for the future after returning to
the life with which he had once broken.
If the army fights well the people will become more
courageous—this was what I felt when I met old man Jo that day.
As I was leaving his house I left some money to help him out
and the next day I sent him a white horse which we had captured
in the Laoheishan battle. The horse was rather lean, but I hoped
that his family could fatten it up and use it as a draught animal. It
was a trifling repayment for the kindness which Jo’s family had
shown to me. Money or wealth could never be adequate to repay
my debt to his family.
In the turbulent events of the subsequent years I lost contact
with Jo’s family. During those years I was active mainly in the Mt.
Paektu area. After moving to the Mt. Paektu area I never visited
Taipinggou. In the autumn of 1959 I discovered the whereabouts
of the Jos. I received a report that a group of visitors to the old
battlefields of the anti-Japanese armed struggle, which was sent to
northeast China, had discovered mother Choe Il Hwa in Ningan.
My greatest benefactors whom for scores of years I had tried to
find by tracing rumours were still resolutely alive, but in another
575
part of the world. I wanted to cross the border right away and run
towards Ningan in order to bow to them in thanks. I wanted to
meet them in the homeland where the dream of our martyrs has
come true and express the deep emotions which we had pent as we
missed each other for such a long time, to retrace old footprints
which are now covered with moss.
However, between her family and me there was a barrier called
the national border. Our meeting called for a complicated
procedure: but such obstacles could not cool my earnest desire to
meet them.
How I wished to be a commoner with an ordinary passport,
even for a few months, so that I could travel, wearing canvas shoes
and puttees, carrying a knapsack on my back and eating rice balls
and some times crossing water up to my knees with my trousers
rolled up, as I did in the guerrilla army, so that I could look round
the old battlefields, covering the graves of my comrades-in-arms
with turves, and exchange greetings with the benefactors who
helped and protected me at the cost of their own lives.
Apparently every politician longs for a commoner’s life. It is
only natural for a head of state to envy a commoner’s life.
After liberation I had many opportunities to visit China and the
Soviet Union. In Manchuria and Soviet Central Asia there were
many comrades-in-arms and benefactors whom I wanted to meet.
But the official duties of a Head of State did not permit me to
include private concerns in my itinerary. I had to devote all my
thoughts to the reconstruction of a country which had been
576
devastated in two great wars—the anti-Japanese war and the antiUS war.
If I had visited the Soviet Union or China as a commoner, I
would have had no difficulty in meeting all those people with
whom I came into contact during the anti-Japanese war. This is the
reason I sometimes envy a commoner’s life.
If I say I feel restricted in my personal and daily life because I
am the Head of State who leads the country, some people may ask
doubtfully, “How can this be?” If I say I am going to some place to
give personal guidance, some officials will say, “Mr. President, the
weather is not fine there.” If I say I am going somewhere to meet
certain people, they say, “Mr. President, there is a swamp on that
route, so the car cannot go in that direction.” Of course, they do
this out of consideration for me, but such concern means that I am
not free.
The following year mother Choe Il Hwa returned home with her
family. After various twists and turns lasting 60 years, the hateful
wanderings of this family, which began with old man Jo’s move to
Helong, concluded with his descendants’ returning home to
Pyongyang. Just imagine the feelings of the Jos at the sight of the
independent homeland, a country of freedom and a state which
was now rising magnificently on the debris, beneath the banner of
self-reliance.
Choe Il Hwa returned home at the historic moment when the
whole country was in turmoil over the repatriation of Koreans
from Japan, a process which the world called a “great national
577
migration from capitalism to socialism.” In this ecstatic mood of
repatriation the Jos returned home.
By that time Choe Il Hwa was 67 years old. Her hair was grey
as if she carried the snow in the shade of the Dawaizi valley on her
head. When she met me she cried and grasped my hands as the
wife of Ryang Se Bong had done.
“Mother, why are you crying on this happy day, when we met
again among the living?”
I took out my handkerchief to wipe away her tears, but she
raised the tie of her dress to her eyes.
“I am crying at the memory of the days when you were
suffering from a cold fit.”
“Don’t mention my suffering. You and grandfather Jo did a
great deal to help me. My feelings of gratitude to you made me
keep trying to find your family after liberation, and I sent many
people to Manchuria. Our ways parted in the summer of 1935 in
Taipinggou. I was told that you had moved to Ningan because the
‘punitive’ operations became so violent. How did you get along
afterwards?”
“We used the white horse to gather firewood and sold it to eke
out a living. Had it not been for the horse you gave us, we would
have all starved to death.”
“I am glad the white horse was of use. Is it true that grandfather
Jo Thaek Ju died in 1953?”
“Yes. While he was alive, my father-in-law talked of nothing
but you, Premier. Whenever he heard a rumour that American
578
planes had bombed Pyongyang, he could not sleep,
saying ‘General Kim Il Sung must be safe’ or ‘He is suffering
too much.’ ”
I was deeply moved to hear from her that the old man had not
forgotten me until he breathed his last, and had wished me good
health. The people’s hearts remain unchanged. Everything in the
world has changed, but the people’s love for us has never changed.
This love handed down from yesterday will be carried forward in
the future. It will never be stained by adversity and misfortune, but
shine for ever like a jewel.
“If only he had lived seven years longer, grandfather Jo could
have returned home. It is a great pity. Even today, I also
sometimes think of the log-cabin in Dawaizi. Have you ever been
there since you left it?”
“No, I haven’t. I do not think I could live there again.”
“You need not go to that mountain valley again. You have
suffered too many hardships in the course of your life, and you
must live in comfort for the rest of your days, cared for by your
children. I will find a house for you.”
When she called at my house on April 15, 1961 to congratulate
me on my 49th birthday, Choe Il Hwa presented me with a
fountain-pen. She was shy as she explained her gift.
“Mr. Premier, the white horse you gave our family became, as it
were, this fountain-pen. We fattened up the white horse and used it
for farming as you told us to, but we bartered it for an ox for fear
that the Japanese would requisition it as a war-horse. Our living
579
depended on that ox. After liberation we registered the ox in a
Chinese cooperative society. Before I returned home I received the
purchase price for the ox and I bought this fountain-pen with the
money. I present this fountain-pen to you with wishes for a long
life and good health and success in your work. I hope you will
accept it as a token of my very best wishes.”
I felt profoundly moved as I looked back upon the many trials
and ordeals of our people’s history, a history epitomized by the Jo
family, who travelled a long road on which a white horse became a
fountain-pen.
“Thank you, mother. I will live long and serve the people as
you wish.”
On August 15 that year, when all the families of the country
were celebrating the 16th anniversary of national liberation, I
called at mother Choe’s house on the Taedong River. Children’s
laughter was ringing in the rooms full of the fresh spirit of life in a
new home. I had personally chosen the site of this block of flats
for writers and anti-Japanese revolutionary veterans and had
scrutinized its design. In those days there was no better block of
flats in Pyongyang.
Pyongyang citizens compare the Kyongsang-dong area where
Choe lives with the yolk of an egg.
“Mother, do you like this flat?”
“Of course, I like it. I have never lived in such a fine house.”
She opened the window wide to look out on the river. She was
obviously proud of her new house. A cool breeze was blowing
580
from the river, gently ruffling her hair, turned grey by many
hardships.
“I selected your house on the riverside because you lived in the
remote mountains all your life. Won’t you miss the mountains
sometimes?”
“No, I prefer to see the Taedong River. I feel I am putting on
weight living here by the river.”
“But still you may miss the mountain life. Dawaizi was a barren
land where life is very hard, but the air there was fresh. If you miss
the fresh mountain air, you should climb up Moran Hill. I thought
you might miss the mountain, and I chose this house near Moran
Hill so that you could go there to walk. When better houses are
built in future, I will give you a new home.”
“Mr. Premier, I am satisfied with this house. All I want is to
live near you.”
She came out to the entrance door of the block of flats to see me
off. When I held out my hand to say good-bye, she grasped it
tightly and asked me a serious question.
“Mr. Premier, have you any experienced doctor near you?” I
was embarrassed by the irrelevance of her question.
“We have many doctors. Why do you ask?”
“I was thinking of the days when you were suffering from that
cold fit. Who will take care of you if another virulent disease
should strike you?”
“Don’t worry, mother, I am in good health. Even if I should
contract such an illness, I am not afraid, because I am near you,
581
who are so experienced in curing fits of cold.”
After I left Choe, I looked round the main streets of the capital
sunk in deep thought. There was an animated holiday atmosphere
in the streets. Sungri Street and the People’s Army Street, in which
the movement to build 20 thousand flats was launched, and all the
main streets of Pyongyang had been improved with magnificent
public buildings and multi-storeyed blocks of flats. In the eight
years since the war, tens of thousands of Pyongyang citizens had
left their dugouts and moved into the newly-built blocks of flats
which were one of the wonderful achievements of postwar
reconstruction.
And yet, the work of construction was only just beginning. As
yet, most of the citizens of the capital were still living in shabby
dugouts and old-fashioned one-room houses. They had made
painful sacrifices and suffered appalling hardships, enduring the
crucible of the anti-Japanese and the anti-US wars, trials which no
other people in the world had ever experienced. No people in the
world had shed so much blood, braved such cold winds and missed
so many meals as our people did. For these people we had to build
more good houses, make more nice clothes and build more fine
schools, holiday homes and hospitals. And we had to bring home
more of our compatriots in foreign lands, who yearned for their
homeland. This was what I had to do with my life, for the sake of
the people who had cured me of my sickness and plucked me from
the jaws of death.
These thoughts kept me awake at night.
582
Choe Il Hwa died several years ago, and was buried in the
Patriotic Martyrs Cemetery. Her son, Jo Yong Son, who guided us
to Barengou, and her daughter who used to fetch us water are now
a grandfather and a grandmother in their seventies. It is wonderful
good fortune that they can spend the latter half of their lives in the
liberated homeland. It is thousands of miles from Pyongyang to
Dawaizi. Almost 60 years has already passed since we set out from
that isolated valley covered with deep snow, but the sound of the
swaying forest which protected old man Jo’s solitary house from
the raging snowstorm still rings in my ears.
583
NOTES
1. Takagi Takeo (1905-1981)–Hailing from Fukui Prefecture, Japan, he worked
for the Yomiuri Shimbun from 1930 as a journalist and a leader writer. From
1972 he was the chairman of the Japan-Korea Cultural Exchange Society. His
books on the revolutionary struggle of the great leader Comrade Kim Il Sung
entitled Flames Kindled on Mt. Paektu, Stories about Kim Il Sung in Manchuria
and Kim Il Sung’s Advance into the Homeland are based on the reminiscences
of the veterans of the anti-Japanese armed struggle which he heard during his
several visits to Korea and the reminiscences of Japanese soldiers and
government officials, as well as on confidential documents of the Japanese
imperialists and events which he either covered or witnessed as a special war
correspondent for the Yomiuri Shimbun in Changchun.
2. Ryultoguk–An ideal country described in the Korean classic novel The Tale
of Hong Kil Dong. Hong Kil Dong, the hero of the novel, cursed contemporary
society, and aspired to this country, where life would be pleasant, with no class
differences between the aristocrats and commoners.
3. Ya. T. Novichenko–On March 1, 1946, during a meeting in celebration of
the 27th anniversary of the March First Movement at the Pyongyang Station
Square, Novichenko, a bodyguard at the headquarters of the Soviet Army in
Korea, defended the leader of the Korean revolution by covering with his own
body the hand grenade which was thrown at the platform by reactionaries. As a
result he lost his right hand. He now lives in Russia.
4. Kim Kwang Chol (1965-1990)–An officer of the Korean People’s Army. In
January 1990, during field training, he was killed when he saved more than ten
584
soldiers by covering a hand grenade with his own body just before it exploded.
5. Han Yong Chol–A soldier of the Korean People’s Army. In February 1992,
during preparations for combat training, he died at the age of 21 after throwing
himself over a hand grenade just before it exploded and saving the lives of his
comrades.
6. Kye Wol Hyang–A patriotic woman who helped General Kim Ung So of our
forces to finish off the enemy general Konishi during the occupation of the
Walled City of Pyongyang by the Japanese forces of aggression in June 1592.
7. Ron Kae–A patriotic woman who enticed a Japanese general to go with her,
and then threw him and herself into the Nam River from the Choksok Pavilion
when the Jinju castle was seized during the Imjin Patriotic War (1592-1598).
8. Height 1211–This is a peak situated in the middle east of Korea. It was an
important peak from the strategic point of view during the Korean war (June
1950-July 1953) which was provoked by the US imperialists and south Korean
puppets. The enemy therefore mobilized large numbers of troops, weapons and
equipment and attempted to take the hill at any cost. The defenders of Height
1211, observing the orders of the Supreme Commander Comrade Kim Il Sung
not to yield even an inch of the land to the enemy, repelled and smashed the
enemy’s repeated attacks, displaying unparalleled courage and self-sacrifice in
defending the height, thus making a great contribution to safeguarding the
fatherland. Height 1211 has thus become synonymous with the defence of the
fatherland and the height of heroism. The enemy, who were defeated in the
battle for Height 1211, called this hill “heartbreak ridge,” because they felt
heartbroken at the very sight of the height, and they dubbed the valley south of
the hill the “punch bowl” because they feared that there would be no escape
once they entered it.
585
9. Chun Hyang and the young nobleman Ri–The heroine and hero of the
classic novel The Tale of Chun Hyang. This tale criticizes the caste inequality of
social status in the feudal Ri dynasty, which prevented men and women of the
lower classes and the nobility from loving each other, and proclaims the right to
love and marry regardless of differences in property and social status.

10. Kang Jin Gon (1885-1963)–An anti-Japanese independence fighter hailing
from Riwon, South Hamgyong Province. After taking part in the March First
Popular Uprising, he organized the Association for the Promotion of Industry,
an anti-Japanese organization for independence. He commanded the assault
upon the police substation in Ryongsong in Samsu County. He was arrested by
the Japanese imperialists in August 1923 and served a prison term of nearly 20
years. After the liberation of the country he worked as the Chairman of the
Central Committee of the Peasants’ Union of North Korea from 1946. Later he
was active in turn as a member of the People’s Committee of North Korea, a
deputy to the Supreme People’s Assembly and a member of the Central
Committee of the Workers’ Party of Korea.

11. Ri Yong (1888-1954)–Hailing from Pukchong, South Hamgyong Province,
he graduated from Posong High School in Seoul and later from the military
academy in Zhejiang Province, China in 1918. From 1921 he worked as
commander of the Koryo Volunteers’ Army and concurrently as the
commandant of the military academy attached to it. He also took part in the
battle to eliminate the remnants of the white party, together with the Soviet Red
Army. In 1946 he was Chairman of the New Progressive Party and from 1948
he served in turn as the Minister of City Management, the Minister of Justice
and Minister without Portfolio.
12. Ri Su Bok (1933-1951)–A soldier of the Korean People’s Army, hailing
from Sunchon, South Phyongan Province. During the Korean war provoked by
the US imperialists and south Korean puppets he died at the age of 18 after
586
blocking an enemy pillbox with his breast in the battle to retake the nameless
height adjoining Height 1211 and paving the way for his unit to advance.
13. Widow Paek–An alias of Paek Son Haeng, a philanthropist hailing from
Pyongyang. Even though she was rich she led a simple life and devoted her money to
the needs of society. She donated a vast amount of money to the Changdok School
and for the building of a bridge and a two-storeyed public hall. She was widowed
before the age of 20 but remained faithful to her dead husband until she reached the
age of 80.
14. The Guan’s unit incident–An incident in which the secret guerrilla army of
Ri Kwang in Wangqing disarmed a Chinese anti-Japanese nationalist army unit
called the Guan’s unit, supposedly in order to prevent its surrender to the
Japanese imperialists. The Guan’s unit used this incident as an excuse to launch
an indiscriminate campaign of revenge against the communists, with the result
that relations between the guerrilla army and the national salvation army became
rapidly deteriorated, creating difficulties for the activities of the guerrilla army.
15. The Heihe incident–A bloody fratricide which broke out in 1921 as the
Korean Independence Army units scrambled for hegemony in Heihe City (a free
city) situated in the border area between Manchuria and Russia.
16. Turtle boat–The world’s first armoured warship, made in Korea in the 16th
century.
17. The five ministers–These were Ri Wan Yong, Minister of Education, Ri Ji
Yong, Minister of Home Affairs, Ri Kun Thaek, Minister of Defence, Kwon
Jung Hyon, Minister of Agriculture, Commerce and Industry, and Pak Je Sun,
Minister of Foreign Affairs, who yielded to Japanese pressure and signed the
“Japan-Korea Treaty” (Ulsa Treaty), an unequal and aggressive treaty which
Japan imposed upon Korea in November 1905.